<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0005">CHAPTER I</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0006">The Time Traveller (for so it will be convenient to speak of him) was expounding a recondite matter to us. </span>
      <span id="f0007">His grey eyes shone and twinkled, and his usually pale face was flushed and animated. </span>
      <span id="f0008">The fire burned brightly, and the soft radiance of the incandescent lights in the lilies of silver caught the bubbles that flashed and passed in our glasses. </span>
      <span id="f0009">Our chairs, being his patents, embraced and caressed us rather than submitted to be sat upon, and there was that luxurious after-dinner atmosphere when thought roams gracefully free of the trammels of precision. </span>
      <span id="f0010">And he put it to us in this way—marking the points with a lean forefinger—as we sat and lazily admired his earnestness over this new paradox (as we thought it) and his fecundity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0011">&#39;You must follow me carefully. </span>
      <span id="f0012">I shall have to controvert one or two ideas that are almost universally accepted. </span>
      <span id="f0013">The geometry, for instance, they taught you at school is founded on a misconception.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0014">&#39;Is not that rather a large thing to expect us to begin upon?&#39; said Filby, an argumentative person with red hair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0015">&#39;I do not mean to ask you to accept anything without reasonable ground for it. </span>
      <span id="f0016">You will soon admit as much as I need from you. </span>
      <span id="f0017">You know of course that a mathematical line, a line of thickness nil, has no real existence. </span>
      <span id="f0018">They taught you that? </span>
      <span id="f0019">Neither has a mathematical plane. </span>
      <span id="f0020">These things are mere abstractions.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0021">&#39;That is all right,&#39; said the Psychologist.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0022">&#39;Nor, having only length, breadth, and thickness, can a cube have a real existence.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0023">&#39;There I object,&#39; said Filby. </span>
      <span id="f0024">&#39;Of course a solid body may exist. </span>
      <span id="f0025">All real things—&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0026">&#39;So most people think. </span>
      <span id="f0027">But wait a moment. </span>
      <span id="f0028">Can an instantaneous cube exist?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0029">&#39;Don&#39;t follow you,&#39; said Filby.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0030">&#39;Can a cube that does not last for any time at all, have a real existence?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0031">Filby became pensive. </span>
      <span id="f0032">&#39;Clearly,&#39; the Time Traveller proceeded, &#39;any real body must have extension in four directions: it must have Length, Breadth, Thickness, and—Duration. </span>
      <span id="f0033">But through a natural infirmity of the flesh, which I will explain to you in a moment, we incline to overlook this fact. </span>
      <span id="f0034">There are really four dimensions, three which we call the three planes of Space, and a fourth, Time. </span>
      <span id="f0035">There is, however, a tendency to draw an unreal distinction between the former three dimensions and the latter, because it happens that our consciousness moves intermittently in one direction along the latter from the beginning to the end of our lives.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0036">&#39;That,&#39; said a very young man, making spasmodic efforts to relight his cigar over the lamp; &#39;that ... </span>
      <span id="f0037">very clear indeed.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0038">&#39;Now, it is very remarkable that this is so extensively overlooked,&#39; continued the Time Traveller, with a slight accession of cheerfulness. </span>
      <span id="f0039">&#39;Really this is what is meant by the Fourth Dimension, though some people who talk about the Fourth Dimension do not know they mean it. </span>
      <span id="f0040">It is only another way of looking at Time. </span>
      <span id="f0041">There is no difference between Time and any of the three dimensions of Space except that our consciousness moves along it. </span>
      <span id="f0042">But some foolish people have got hold of the wrong side of that idea. </span>
      <span id="f0043">You have all heard what they have to say about this Fourth Dimension?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0044">&#39;I have not,&#39; said the Provincial Mayor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0045">&#39;It is simply this. </span>
      <span id="f0046">That Space, as our mathematicians have it, is spoken of as having three dimensions, which one may call Length, Breadth, and Thickness, and is always definable by reference to three planes, each at right angles to the others. </span>
      <span id="f0047">But some philosophical people have been asking why three dimensions particularly—why not another direction at right angles to the other three?—and have even tried to construct a Four-Dimension geometry. </span>
      <span id="f0048">Professor Simon Newcomb was expounding this to the New York Mathematical Society only a month or so ago. </span>
      <span id="f0049">You know how on a flat surface, which has only two dimensions, we can represent a figure of a three-dimensional solid, and similarly they think that by models of three dimensions they could represent one of four—if they could master the perspective of the thing. </span>
      <span id="f0050">See?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0051">&#39;I think so,&#39; murmured the Provincial Mayor; and, knitting his brows, he lapsed into an introspective state, his lips moving as one who repeats mystic words. </span>
      <span id="f0052">&#39;Yes, I think I see it now,&#39; he said after some time, brightening in a quite transitory manner.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0053">&#39;Well, I do not mind telling you I have been at work upon this geometry of Four Dimensions for some time. </span>
      <span id="f0054">Some of my results are curious. </span>
      <span id="f0055">For instance, here is a portrait of a man at eight years old, another at fifteen, another at seventeen, another at twenty-three, and so on. </span>
      <span id="f0056">All these are evidently sections, as it were, Three-Dimensional representations of his Four-Dimensioned being, which is a fixed and unalterable thing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0057">&#39;Scientific people,&#39; proceeded the Time Traveller, after the pause required for the proper assimilation of this, &#39;know very well that Time is only a kind of Space. </span>
      <span id="f0058">Here is a popular scientific diagram, a weather record. </span>
      <span id="f0059">This line I trace with my finger shows the movement of the barometer. </span>
      <span id="f0060">Yesterday it was so high, yesterday night it fell, then this morning it rose again, and so gently upward to here. </span>
      <span id="f0061">Surely the mercury did not trace this line in any of the dimensions of Space generally recognized? </span>
      <span id="f0062">But certainly it traced such a line, and that line, therefore, we must conclude was along the Time-Dimension.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0063">&#39;But,&#39; said the Medical Man, staring hard at a coal in the fire, &#39;if Time is really only a fourth dimension of Space, why is it, and why has it always been, regarded as something different? </span>
      <span id="f0064">And why cannot we move in Time as we move about in the other dimensions of Space?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0065">The Time Traveller smiled. </span>
      <span id="f0066">&#39;Are you sure we can move freely in Space? </span>
      <span id="f0067">Right and left we can go, backward and forward freely enough, and men always have done so. </span>
      <span id="f0068">I admit we move freely in two dimensions. </span>
      <span id="f0069">But how about up and down? </span>
      <span id="f0070">Gravitation limits us there.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0071">&#39;Not exactly,&#39; said the Medical Man. </span>
      <span id="f0072">&#39;There are balloons.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0073">&#39;But before the balloons, save for spasmodic jumping and the inequalities of the surface, man had no freedom of vertical movement.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0074">&#39;Still they could move a little up and down,&#39; said the Medical Man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0075">&#39;Easier, far easier down than up.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0076">&#39;And you cannot move at all in Time, you cannot get away from the present moment.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0077">&#39;My dear sir, that is just where you are wrong. </span>
      <span id="f0078">That is just where the whole world has gone wrong. </span>
      <span id="f0079">We are always getting away from the present moment. </span>
      <span id="f0080">Our mental existences, which are immaterial and have no dimensions, are passing along the Time-Dimension with a uniform velocity from the cradle to the grave. </span>
      <span id="f0081">Just as we should travel down if we began our existence fifty miles above the earth&#39;s surface.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0082">&#39;But the great difficulty is this,&#39; interrupted the Psychologist. </span>
      <span id="f0083">&#39;You can move about in all directions of Space, but you cannot move about in Time.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0084">&#39;That is the germ of my great discovery. </span>
      <span id="f0085">But you are wrong to say that we cannot move about in Time. </span>
      <span id="f0086">For instance, if I am recalling an incident very vividly I go back to the instant of its occurrence: I become absent-minded, as you say. </span>
      <span id="f0087">I jump back for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f0088">Of course we have no means of staying back for any length of Time, any more than a savage or an animal has of staying six feet above the ground. </span>
      <span id="f0089">But a civilized man is better off than the savage in this respect. </span>
      <span id="f0090">He can go up against gravitation in a balloon, and why should he not hope that ultimately he may be able to stop or accelerate his drift along the Time-Dimension, or even turn about and travel the other way?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0091">&#39;Oh, this,&#39; began Filby, &#39;is all—&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0092">&#39;Why not?&#39; said the Time Traveller.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0093">&#39;It&#39;s against reason,&#39; said Filby.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0094">&#39;What reason?&#39; said the Time Traveller.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0095">&#39;You can show black is white by argument,&#39; said Filby, &#39;but you will never convince me.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0096">&#39;Possibly not,&#39; said the Time Traveller. </span>
      <span id="f0097">&#39;But now you begin to see the object of my investigations into the geometry of Four Dimensions. </span>
      <span id="f0098">Long ago I had a vague inkling of a machine—&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0099">&#39;To travel through Time!&#39; exclaimed the Very Young Man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0100">&#39;That shall travel indifferently in any direction of Space and Time, as the driver determines.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0101">Filby contented himself with laughter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0102">&#39;But I have experimental verification,&#39; said the Time Traveller.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0103">&#39;It would be remarkably convenient for the historian,&#39; the Psychologist suggested. </span>
      <span id="f0104">&#39;One might travel back and verify the accepted account of the Battle of Hastings, for instance!&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0105">&#39;Don&#39;t you think you would attract attention?&#39; said the Medical Man. </span>
      <span id="f0106">&#39;Our ancestors had no great tolerance for anachronisms.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0107">&#39;One might get one&#39;s Greek from the very lips of Homer and Plato,&#39; the Very Young Man thought.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0108">&#39;In which case they would certainly plough you for the Little-go. </span>
      <span id="f0109">The German scholars have improved Greek so much.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0110">&#39;Then there is the future,&#39; said the Very Young Man. </span>
      <span id="f0111">&#39;Just think! </span>
      <span id="f0112">One might invest all one&#39;s money, leave it to accumulate at interest, and hurry on ahead!&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0113">&#39;To discover a society,&#39; said I, &#39;erected on a strictly communistic basis.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0114">&#39;Of all the wild extravagant theories!&#39; began the Psychologist.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0115">&#39;Yes, so it seemed to me, and so I never talked of it until—&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0116">&#39;Experimental verification!&#39; cried I. </span>
      <span id="f0117">&#39;You are going to verify that?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0118">&#39;The experiment!&#39; cried Filby, who was getting brain-weary.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0119">&#39;Let&#39;s see your experiment anyhow,&#39; said the Psychologist, &#39;though it&#39;s all humbug, you know.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0120">The Time Traveller smiled round at us. </span>
      <span id="f0121">Then, still smiling faintly, and with his hands deep in his trousers pockets, he walked slowly out of the room, and we heard his slippers shuffling down the long passage to his laboratory.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0122">The Psychologist looked at us. </span>
      <span id="f0123">&#39;I wonder what he&#39;s got?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0124">&#39;Some sleight-of-hand trick or other,&#39; said the Medical Man, and Filby tried to tell us about a conjurer he had seen at Burslem; but before he had finished his preface the Time Traveller came back, and Filby&#39;s anecdote collapsed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0125">The thing the Time Traveller held in his hand was a glittering metallic framework, scarcely larger than a small clock, and very delicately made. </span>
      <span id="f0126">There was ivory in it, and some transparent crystalline substance. </span>
      <span id="f0127">And now I must be explicit, for this that follows—unless his explanation is to be accepted—is an absolutely unaccountable thing. </span>
      <span id="f0128">He took one of the small octagonal tables that were scattered about the room, and set it in front of the fire, with two legs on the hearthrug. </span>
      <span id="f0129">On this table he placed the mechanism. </span>
      <span id="f0130">Then he drew up a chair, and sat down. </span>
      <span id="f0131">The only other object on the table was a small shaded lamp, the bright light of which fell upon the model. </span>
      <span id="f0132">There were also perhaps a dozen candles about, two in brass candlesticks upon the mantel and several in sconces, so that the room was brilliantly illuminated. </span>
      <span id="f0133">I sat in a low arm-chair nearest the fire, and I drew this forward so as to be almost between the Time Traveller and the fireplace. </span>
      <span id="f0134">Filby sat behind him, looking over his shoulder. </span>
      <span id="f0135">The Medical Man and the Provincial Mayor watched him in profile from the right, the Psychologist from the left. </span>
      <span id="f0136">The Very Young Man stood behind the Psychologist. </span>
      <span id="f0137">We were all on the alert. </span>
      <span id="f0138">It appears incredible to me that any kind of trick, however subtly conceived and however adroitly done, could have been played upon us under these conditions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0139">The Time Traveller looked at us, and then at the mechanism. </span>
      <span id="f0140">&#39;Well?&#39; said the Psychologist.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0141">&#39;This little affair,&#39; said the Time Traveller, resting his elbows upon the table and pressing his hands together above the apparatus, &#39;is only a model. </span>
      <span id="f0142">It is my plan for a machine to travel through time. </span>
      <span id="f0143">You will notice that it looks singularly askew, and that there is an odd twinkling appearance about this bar, as though it was in some way unreal.&#39; He pointed to the part with his finger. </span>
      <span id="f0144">&#39;Also, here is one little white lever, and here is another.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0145">The Medical Man got up out of his chair and peered into the thing. </span>
      <span id="f0146">&#39;It&#39;s beautifully made,&#39; he said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0147">&#39;It took two years to make,&#39; retorted the Time Traveller. </span>
      <span id="f0148">Then, when we had all imitated the action of the Medical Man, he said: &#39;Now I want you clearly to understand that this lever, being pressed over, sends the machine gliding into the future, and this other reverses the motion. </span>
      <span id="f0149">This saddle represents the seat of a time traveller. </span>
      <span id="f0150">Presently I am going to press the lever, and off the machine will go. </span>
      <span id="f0151">It will vanish, pass into future Time, and disappear. </span>
      <span id="f0152">Have a good look at the thing. </span>
      <span id="f0153">Look at the table too, and satisfy yourselves there is no trickery. </span>
      <span id="f0154">I don&#39;t want to waste this model, and then be told I&#39;m a quack.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0155">There was a minute&#39;s pause perhaps. </span>
      <span id="f0156">The Psychologist seemed about to speak to me, but changed his mind. </span>
      <span id="f0157">Then the Time Traveller put forth his finger towards the lever. </span>
      <span id="f0158">&#39;No,&#39; he said suddenly. </span>
      <span id="f0159">&#39;Lend me your hand.&#39; And turning to the Psychologist, he took that individual&#39;s hand in his own and told him to put out his forefinger. </span>
      <span id="f0160">So that it was the Psychologist himself who sent forth the model Time Machine on its interminable voyage. </span>
      <span id="f0161">We all saw the lever turn. </span>
      <span id="f0162">I am absolutely certain there was no trickery. </span>
      <span id="f0163">There was a breath of wind, and the lamp flame jumped. </span>
      <span id="f0164">One of the candles on the mantel was blown out, and the little machine suddenly swung round, became indistinct, was seen as a ghost for a second perhaps, as an eddy of faintly glittering brass and ivory; and it was gone—vanished! </span>
      <span id="f0165">Save for the lamp the table was bare.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0166">Everyone was silent for a minute. </span>
      <span id="f0167">Then Filby said he was damned.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0168">The Psychologist recovered from his stupor, and suddenly looked under the table. </span>
      <span id="f0169">At that the Time Traveller laughed cheerfully. </span>
      <span id="f0170">&#39;Well?&#39; he said, with a reminiscence of the Psychologist. </span>
      <span id="f0171">Then, getting up, he went to the tobacco jar on the mantel, and with his back to us began to fill his pipe.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0172">We stared at each other. </span>
      <span id="f0173">&#39;Look here,&#39; said the Medical Man, &#39;are you in earnest about this? </span>
      <span id="f0174">Do you seriously believe that that machine has travelled into time?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0175">&#39;Certainly,&#39; said the Time Traveller, stooping to light a spill at the fire. </span>
      <span id="f0176">Then he turned, lighting his pipe, to look at the Psychologist&#39;s face. </span>
      <span id="f0177">(The Psychologist, to show that he was not unhinged, helped himself to a cigar and tried to light it uncut.) &#39;What is more, I have a big machine nearly finished in there&#39;—he indicated the laboratory—&#39;and when that is put together I mean to have a journey on my own account.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0178">&#39;You mean to say that that machine has travelled into the future?&#39; said Filby.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0179">&#39;Into the future or the past—I don&#39;t, for certain, know which.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0180">After an interval the Psychologist had an inspiration. </span>
      <span id="f0181">&#39;It must have gone into the past if it has gone anywhere,&#39; he said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0182">&#39;Why?&#39; said the Time Traveller.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0183">&#39;Because I presume that it has not moved in space, and if it travelled into the future it would still be here all this time, since it must have travelled through this time.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0184">&#39;But,&#39; I said, &#39;If it travelled into the past it would have been visible when we came first into this room; and last Thursday when we were here; and the Thursday before that; and so forth!&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0185">&#39;Serious objections,&#39; remarked the Provincial Mayor, with an air of impartiality, turning towards the Time Traveller.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0186">&#39;Not a bit,&#39; said the Time Traveller, and, to the Psychologist: &#39;You think. </span>
      <span id="f0187">You can explain that. </span>
      <span id="f0188">It&#39;s presentation below the threshold, you know, diluted presentation.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0189">&#39;Of course,&#39; said the Psychologist, and reassured us. </span>
      <span id="f0190">&#39;That&#39;s a simple point of psychology. </span>
      <span id="f0191">I should have thought of it. </span>
      <span id="f0192">It&#39;s plain enough, and helps the paradox delightfully. </span>
      <span id="f0193">We cannot see it, nor can we appreciate this machine, any more than we can the spoke of a wheel spinning, or a bullet flying through the air. </span>
      <span id="f0194">If it is travelling through time fifty times or a hundred times faster than we are, if it gets through a minute while we get through a second, the impression it creates will of course be only one-fiftieth or one-hundredth of what it would make if it were not travelling in time. </span>
      <span id="f0195">That&#39;s plain enough.&#39; He passed his hand through the space in which the machine had been. </span>
      <span id="f0196">&#39;You see?&#39; he said, laughing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0197">We sat and stared at the vacant table for a minute or so. </span>
      <span id="f0198">Then the Time Traveller asked us what we thought of it all.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0199">&#39;It sounds plausible enough to-night,&#39; said the Medical Man; &#39;but wait until to-morrow. </span>
      <span id="f0200">Wait for the common sense of the morning.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0201">&#39;Would you like to see the Time Machine itself?&#39; asked the Time Traveller. </span>
      <span id="f0202">And therewith, taking the lamp in his hand, he led the way down the long, draughty corridor to his laboratory. </span>
      <span id="f0203">I remember vividly the flickering light, his queer, broad head in silhouette, the dance of the shadows, how we all followed him, puzzled but incredulous, and how there in the laboratory we beheld a larger edition of the little mechanism which we had seen vanish from before our eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0204">Parts were of nickel, parts of ivory, parts had certainly been filed or sawn out of rock crystal. </span>
      <span id="f0205">The thing was generally complete, but the twisted crystalline bars lay unfinished upon the bench beside some sheets of drawings, and I took one up for a better look at it. </span>
      <span id="f0206">Quartz it seemed to be.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0207">&#39;Look here,&#39; said the Medical Man, &#39;are you perfectly serious? </span>
      <span id="f0208">Or is this a trick—like that ghost you showed us last Christmas?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0209">&#39;Upon that machine,&#39; said the Time Traveller, holding the lamp aloft, &#39;I intend to explore time. </span>
      <span id="f0210">Is that plain? </span>
      <span id="f0211">I was never more serious in my life.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0212">None of us quite knew how to take it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0213">I caught Filby&#39;s eye over the shoulder of the Medical Man, and he winked at me solemnly.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>