<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER II</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0214">CHAPTER II</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0215">I think that at that time none of us quite believed in the Time Machine. </span>
      <span id="f0216">The fact is, the Time Traveller was one of those men who are too clever to be believed: you never felt that you saw all round him; you always suspected some subtle reserve, some ingenuity in ambush, behind his lucid frankness. </span>
      <span id="f0217">Had Filby shown the model and explained the matter in the Time Traveller&#39;s words, we should have shown him far less scepticism. </span>
      <span id="f0218">For we should have perceived his motives; a pork butcher could understand Filby. </span>
      <span id="f0219">But the Time Traveller had more than a touch of whim among his elements, and we distrusted him. </span>
      <span id="f0220">Things that would have made the fame of a less clever man seemed tricks in his hands. </span>
      <span id="f0221">It is a mistake to do things too easily. </span>
      <span id="f0222">The serious people who took him seriously never felt quite sure of his deportment; they were somehow aware that trusting their reputations for judgment with him was like furnishing a nursery with egg-shell china. </span>
      <span id="f0223">So I don&#39;t think any of us said very much about time travelling in the interval between that Thursday and the next, though its odd potentialities ran, no doubt, in most of our minds: its plausibility, that is, its practical incredibleness, the curious possibilities of anachronism and of utter confusion it suggested. </span>
      <span id="f0224">For my own part, I was particularly preoccupied with the trick of the model. </span>
      <span id="f0225">That I remember discussing with the Medical Man, whom I met on Friday at the Linnaean. </span>
      <span id="f0226">He said he had seen a similar thing at Tubingen, and laid considerable stress on the blowing out of the candle. </span>
      <span id="f0227">But how the trick was done he could not explain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0228">The next Thursday I went again to Richmond—I suppose I was one of the Time Traveller&#39;s most constant guests—and, arriving late, found four or five men already assembled in his drawing-room. </span>
      <span id="f0229">The Medical Man was standing before the fire with a sheet of paper in one hand and his watch in the other. </span>
      <span id="f0230">I looked round for the Time Traveller, and—&#39;It&#39;s half-past seven now,&#39; said the Medical Man. </span>
      <span id="f0231">&#39;I suppose we&#39;d better have dinner?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0232">&#39;Where&#39;s——?&#39; said I, naming our host.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0233">&#39;You&#39;ve just come? </span>
      <span id="f0234">It&#39;s rather odd. </span>
      <span id="f0235">He&#39;s unavoidably detained. </span>
      <span id="f0236">He asks me in this note to lead off with dinner at seven if he&#39;s not back. </span>
      <span id="f0237">Says he&#39;ll explain when he comes.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0238">&#39;It seems a pity to let the dinner spoil,&#39; said the Editor of a well-known daily paper; and thereupon the Doctor rang the bell.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0239">The Psychologist was the only person besides the Doctor and myself who had attended the previous dinner. </span>
      <span id="f0240">The other men were Blank, the Editor aforementioned, a certain journalist, and another—a quiet, shy man with a beard—whom I didn&#39;t know, and who, as far as my observation went, never opened his mouth all the evening. </span>
      <span id="f0241">There was some speculation at the dinner-table about the Time Traveller&#39;s absence, and I suggested time travelling, in a half-jocular spirit. </span>
      <span id="f0242">The Editor wanted that explained to him, and the Psychologist volunteered a wooden account of the &#39;ingenious paradox and trick&#39; we had witnessed that day week. </span>
      <span id="f0243">He was in the midst of his exposition when the door from the corridor opened slowly and without noise. </span>
      <span id="f0244">I was facing the door, and saw it first. </span>
      <span id="f0245">&#39;Hallo!&#39; I said. </span>
      <span id="f0246">&#39;At last!&#39; And the door opened wider, and the Time Traveller stood before us. </span>
      <span id="f0247">I gave a cry of surprise. </span>
      <span id="f0248">&#39;Good heavens! </span>
      <span id="f0249">man, what&#39;s the matter?&#39; cried the Medical Man, who saw him next. </span>
      <span id="f0250">And the whole tableful turned towards the door.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0251">He was in an amazing plight. </span>
      <span id="f0252">His coat was dusty and dirty, and smeared with green down the sleeves; his hair disordered, and as it seemed to me greyer—either with dust and dirt or because its colour had actually faded. </span>
      <span id="f0253">His face was ghastly pale; his chin had a brown cut on it—a cut half healed; his expression was haggard and drawn, as by intense suffering. </span>
      <span id="f0254">For a moment he hesitated in the doorway, as if he had been dazzled by the light. </span>
      <span id="f0255">Then he came into the room. </span>
      <span id="f0256">He walked with just such a limp as I have seen in footsore tramps. </span>
      <span id="f0257">We stared at him in silence, expecting him to speak.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0258">He said not a word, but came painfully to the table, and made a motion towards the wine. </span>
      <span id="f0259">The Editor filled a glass of champagne, and pushed it towards him. </span>
      <span id="f0260">He drained it, and it seemed to do him good: for he looked round the table, and the ghost of his old smile flickered across his face. </span>
      <span id="f0261">&#39;What on earth have you been up to, man?&#39; said the Doctor. </span>
      <span id="f0262">The Time Traveller did not seem to hear. </span>
      <span id="f0263">&#39;Don&#39;t let me disturb you,&#39; he said, with a certain faltering articulation. </span>
      <span id="f0264">&#39;I&#39;m all right.&#39; He stopped, held out his glass for more, and took it off at a draught. </span>
      <span id="f0265">&#39;That&#39;s good,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f0266">His eyes grew brighter, and a faint colour came into his cheeks. </span>
      <span id="f0267">His glance flickered over our faces with a certain dull approval, and then went round the warm and comfortable room. </span>
      <span id="f0268">Then he spoke again, still as it were feeling his way among his words. </span>
      <span id="f0269">&#39;I&#39;m going to wash and dress, and then I&#39;ll come down and explain things ... </span>
      <span id="f0270">Save me some of that mutton. </span>
      <span id="f0271">I&#39;m starving for a bit of meat.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0272">He looked across at the Editor, who was a rare visitor, and hoped he was all right. </span>
      <span id="f0273">The Editor began a question. </span>
      <span id="f0274">&#39;Tell you presently,&#39; said the Time Traveller. </span>
      <span id="f0275">&#39;I&#39;m—funny! </span>
      <span id="f0276">Be all right in a minute.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0277">He put down his glass, and walked towards the staircase door. </span>
      <span id="f0278">Again I remarked his lameness and the soft padding sound of his footfall, and standing up in my place, I saw his feet as he went out. </span>
      <span id="f0279">He had nothing on them but a pair of tattered, blood-stained socks. </span>
      <span id="f0280">Then the door closed upon him. </span>
      <span id="f0281">I had half a mind to follow, till I remembered how he detested any fuss about himself. </span>
      <span id="f0282">For a minute, perhaps, my mind was wool-gathering. </span>
      <span id="f0283">Then, &#39;Remarkable Behaviour of an Eminent Scientist,&#39; I heard the Editor say, thinking (after his wont) in headlines. </span>
      <span id="f0284">And this brought my attention back to the bright dinner-table.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0285">&#39;What&#39;s the game?&#39; said the Journalist. </span>
      <span id="f0286">&#39;Has he been doing the Amateur Cadger? </span>
      <span id="f0287">I don&#39;t follow.&#39; I met the eye of the Psychologist, and read my own interpretation in his face. </span>
      <span id="f0288">I thought of the Time Traveller limping painfully upstairs. </span>
      <span id="f0289">I don&#39;t think any one else had noticed his lameness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0290">The first to recover completely from this surprise was the Medical Man, who rang the bell—the Time Traveller hated to have servants waiting at dinner—for a hot plate. </span>
      <span id="f0291">At that the Editor turned to his knife and fork with a grunt, and the Silent Man followed suit. </span>
      <span id="f0292">The dinner was resumed. </span>
      <span id="f0293">Conversation was exclamatory for a little while, with gaps of wonderment; and then the Editor got fervent in his curiosity. </span>
      <span id="f0294">&#39;Does our friend eke out his modest income with a crossing? </span>
      <span id="f0295">or has he his Nebuchadnezzar phases?&#39; he inquired. </span>
      <span id="f0296">&#39;I feel assured it&#39;s this business of the Time Machine,&#39; I said, and took up the Psychologist&#39;s account of our previous meeting. </span>
      <span id="f0297">The new guests were frankly incredulous. </span>
      <span id="f0298">The Editor raised objections. </span>
      <span id="f0299">&#39;What was this time travelling? </span>
      <span id="f0300">A man couldn&#39;t cover himself with dust by rolling in a paradox, could he?&#39; And then, as the idea came home to him, he resorted to caricature. </span>
      <span id="f0301">Hadn&#39;t they any clothes-brushes in the Future? </span>
      <span id="f0302">The Journalist too, would not believe at any price, and joined the Editor in the easy work of heaping ridicule on the whole thing. </span>
      <span id="f0303">They were both the new kind of journalist—very joyous, irreverent young men. </span>
      <span id="f0304">&#39;Our Special Correspondent in the Day after To-morrow reports,&#39; the Journalist was saying—or rather shouting—when the Time Traveller came back. </span>
      <span id="f0305">He was dressed in ordinary evening clothes, and nothing save his haggard look remained of the change that had startled me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0306">&#39;I say,&#39; said the Editor hilariously, &#39;these chaps here say you have been travelling into the middle of next week! </span>
      <span id="f0307">Tell us all about little Rosebery, will you? </span>
      <span id="f0308">What will you take for the lot?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0309">The Time Traveller came to the place reserved for him without a word. </span>
      <span id="f0310">He smiled quietly, in his old way. </span>
      <span id="f0311">&#39;Where&#39;s my mutton?&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f0312">&#39;What a treat it is to stick a fork into meat again!&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0313">&#39;Story!&#39; cried the Editor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0314">&#39;Story be damned!&#39; said the Time Traveller. </span>
      <span id="f0315">&#39;I want something to eat. </span>
      <span id="f0316">I won&#39;t say a word until I get some peptone into my arteries. </span>
      <span id="f0317">Thanks. </span>
      <span id="f0318">And the salt.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0319">&#39;One word,&#39; said I. </span>
      <span id="f0320">&#39;Have you been time travelling?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0321">&#39;Yes,&#39; said the Time Traveller, with his mouth full, nodding his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0322">&#39;I&#39;d give a shilling a line for a verbatim note,&#39; said the Editor. </span>
      <span id="f0323">The Time Traveller pushed his glass towards the Silent Man and rang it with his fingernail; at which the Silent Man, who had been staring at his face, started convulsively, and poured him wine. </span>
      <span id="f0324">The rest of the dinner was uncomfortable. </span>
      <span id="f0325">For my own part, sudden questions kept on rising to my lips, and I dare say it was the same with the others. </span>
      <span id="f0326">The Journalist tried to relieve the tension by telling anecdotes of Hettie Potter. </span>
      <span id="f0327">The Time Traveller devoted his attention to his dinner, and displayed the appetite of a tramp. </span>
      <span id="f0328">The Medical Man smoked a cigarette, and watched the Time Traveller through his eyelashes. </span>
      <span id="f0329">The Silent Man seemed even more clumsy than usual, and drank champagne with regularity and determination out of sheer nervousness. </span>
      <span id="f0330">At last the Time Traveller pushed his plate away, and looked round us. </span>
      <span id="f0331">&#39;I suppose I must apologize,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f0332">&#39;I was simply starving. </span>
      <span id="f0333">I&#39;ve had a most amazing time.&#39; He reached out his hand for a cigar, and cut the end. </span>
      <span id="f0334">&#39;But come into the smoking-room. </span>
      <span id="f0335">It&#39;s too long a story to tell over greasy plates.&#39; And ringing the bell in passing, he led the way into the adjoining room.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0336">&#39;You have told Blank, and Dash, and Chose about the machine?&#39; he said to me, leaning back in his easy-chair and naming the three new guests.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0337">&#39;But the thing&#39;s a mere paradox,&#39; said the Editor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0338">&#39;I can&#39;t argue to-night. </span>
      <span id="f0339">I don&#39;t mind telling you the story, but I can&#39;t argue. </span>
      <span id="f0340">I will,&#39; he went on, &#39;tell you the story of what has happened to me, if you like, but you must refrain from interruptions. </span>
      <span id="f0341">I want to tell it. </span>
      <span id="f0342">Badly. </span>
      <span id="f0343">Most of it will sound like lying. </span>
      <span id="f0344">So be it! </span>
      <span id="f0345">It&#39;s true—every word of it, all the same. </span>
      <span id="f0346">I was in my laboratory at four o&#39;clock, and since then ... </span>
      <span id="f0347">I&#39;ve lived eight days ... </span>
      <span id="f0348">such days as no human being ever lived before! </span>
      <span id="f0349">I&#39;m nearly worn out, but I shan&#39;t sleep till I&#39;ve told this thing over to you. </span>
      <span id="f0350">Then I shall go to bed. </span>
      <span id="f0351">But no interruptions! </span>
      <span id="f0352">Is it agreed?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0353">&#39;Agreed,&#39; said the Editor, and the rest of us echoed &#39;Agreed.&#39; And with that the Time Traveller began his story as I have set it forth. </span>
      <span id="f0354">He sat back in his chair at first, and spoke like a weary man. </span>
      <span id="f0355">Afterwards he got more animated. </span>
      <span id="f0356">In writing it down I feel with only too much keenness the inadequacy of pen and ink—and, above all, my own inadequacy—to express its quality. </span>
      <span id="f0357">You read, I will suppose, attentively enough; but you cannot see the speaker&#39;s white, sincere face in the bright circle of the little lamp, nor hear the intonation of his voice. </span>
      <span id="f0358">You cannot know how his expression followed the turns of his story! </span>
      <span id="f0359">Most of us hearers were in shadow, for the candles in the smoking-room had not been lighted, and only the face of the Journalist and the legs of the Silent Man from the knees downward were illuminated. </span>
      <span id="f0360">At first we glanced now and again at each other. </span>
      <span id="f0361">After a time we ceased to do that, and looked only at the Time Traveller&#39;s face.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>