<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER III</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0362">CHAPTER III</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0363">&#39;I told some of you last Thursday of the principles of the Time Machine, and showed you the actual thing itself, incomplete in the workshop. </span>
      <span id="f0364">There it is now, a little travel-worn, truly; and one of the ivory bars is cracked, and a brass rail bent; but the rest of it&#39;s sound enough. </span>
      <span id="f0365">I expected to finish it on Friday, but on Friday, when the putting together was nearly done, I found that one of the nickel bars was exactly one inch too short, and this I had to get remade; so that the thing was not complete until this morning. </span>
      <span id="f0366">It was at ten o&#39;clock to-day that the first of all Time Machines began its career. </span>
      <span id="f0367">I gave it a last tap, tried all the screws again, put one more drop of oil on the quartz rod, and sat myself in the saddle. </span>
      <span id="f0368">I suppose a suicide who holds a pistol to his skull feels much the same wonder at what will come next as I felt then. </span>
      <span id="f0369">I took the starting lever in one hand and the stopping one in the other, pressed the first, and almost immediately the second. </span>
      <span id="f0370">I seemed to reel; I felt a nightmare sensation of falling; and, looking round, I saw the laboratory exactly as before. </span>
      <span id="f0371">Had anything happened? </span>
      <span id="f0372">For a moment I suspected that my intellect had tricked me. </span>
      <span id="f0373">Then I noted the clock. </span>
      <span id="f0374">A moment before, as it seemed, it had stood at a minute or so past ten; now it was nearly half-past three!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0375">&#39;I drew a breath, set my teeth, gripped the starting lever with both hands, and went off with a thud. </span>
      <span id="f0376">The laboratory got hazy and went dark. </span>
      <span id="f0377">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0378">Watchett came in and walked, apparently without seeing me, towards the garden door. </span>
      <span id="f0379">I suppose it took her a minute or so to traverse the place, but to me she seemed to shoot across the room like a rocket. </span>
      <span id="f0380">I pressed the lever over to its extreme position. </span>
      <span id="f0381">The night came like the turning out of a lamp, and in another moment came to-morrow. </span>
      <span id="f0382">The laboratory grew faint and hazy, then fainter and ever fainter. </span>
      <span id="f0383">To-morrow night came black, then day again, night again, day again, faster and faster still. </span>
      <span id="f0384">An eddying murmur filled my ears, and a strange, dumb confusedness descended on my mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0385">&#39;I am afraid I cannot convey the peculiar sensations of time travelling. </span>
      <span id="f0386">They are excessively unpleasant. </span>
      <span id="f0387">There is a feeling exactly like that one has upon a switchback—of a helpless headlong motion! </span>
      <span id="f0388">I felt the same horrible anticipation, too, of an imminent smash. </span>
      <span id="f0389">As I put on pace, night followed day like the flapping of a black wing. </span>
      <span id="f0390">The dim suggestion of the laboratory seemed presently to fall away from me, and I saw the sun hopping swiftly across the sky, leaping it every minute, and every minute marking a day. </span>
      <span id="f0391">I supposed the laboratory had been destroyed and I had come into the open air. </span>
      <span id="f0392">I had a dim impression of scaffolding, but I was already going too fast to be conscious of any moving things. </span>
      <span id="f0393">The slowest snail that ever crawled dashed by too fast for me. </span>
      <span id="f0394">The twinkling succession of darkness and light was excessively painful to the eye. </span>
      <span id="f0395">Then, in the intermittent darknesses, I saw the moon spinning swiftly through her quarters from new to full, and had a faint glimpse of the circling stars. </span>
      <span id="f0396">Presently, as I went on, still gaining velocity, the palpitation of night and day merged into one continuous greyness; the sky took on a wonderful deepness of blue, a splendid luminous color like that of early twilight; the jerking sun became a streak of fire, a brilliant arch, in space; the moon a fainter fluctuating band; and I could see nothing of the stars, save now and then a brighter circle flickering in the blue.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0397">&#39;The landscape was misty and vague. </span>
      <span id="f0398">I was still on the hill-side upon which this house now stands, and the shoulder rose above me grey and dim. </span>
      <span id="f0399">I saw trees growing and changing like puffs of vapour, now brown, now green; they grew, spread, shivered, and passed away. </span>
      <span id="f0400">I saw huge buildings rise up faint and fair, and pass like dreams. </span>
      <span id="f0401">The whole surface of the earth seemed changed—melting and flowing under my eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0402">The little hands upon the dials that registered my speed raced round faster and faster. </span>
      <span id="f0403">Presently I noted that the sun belt swayed up and down, from solstice to solstice, in a minute or less, and that consequently my pace was over a year a minute; and minute by minute the white snow flashed across the world, and vanished, and was followed by the bright, brief green of spring.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0404">&#39;The unpleasant sensations of the start were less poignant now. </span>
      <span id="f0405">They merged at last into a kind of hysterical exhilaration. </span>
      <span id="f0406">I remarked indeed a clumsy swaying of the machine, for which I was unable to account. </span>
      <span id="f0407">But my mind was too confused to attend to it, so with a kind of madness growing upon me, I flung myself into futurity. </span>
      <span id="f0408">At first I scarce thought of stopping, scarce thought of anything but these new sensations. </span>
      <span id="f0409">But presently a fresh series of impressions grew up in my mind—a certain curiosity and therewith a certain dread—until at last they took complete possession of me. </span>
      <span id="f0410">What strange developments of humanity, what wonderful advances upon our rudimentary civilization, I thought, might not appear when I came to look nearly into the dim elusive world that raced and fluctuated before my eyes! </span>
      <span id="f0411">I saw great and splendid architecture rising about me, more massive than any buildings of our own time, and yet, as it seemed, built of glimmer and mist. </span>
      <span id="f0412">I saw a richer green flow up the hill-side, and remain there, without any wintry intermission. </span>
      <span id="f0413">Even through the veil of my confusion the earth seemed very fair. </span>
      <span id="f0414">And so my mind came round to the business of stopping.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0415">&#39;The peculiar risk lay in the possibility of my finding some substance in the space which I, or the machine, occupied. </span>
      <span id="f0416">So long as I travelled at a high velocity through time, this scarcely mattered; I was, so to speak, attenuated—was slipping like a vapour through the interstices of intervening substances! </span>
      <span id="f0417">But to come to a stop involved the jamming of myself, molecule by molecule, into whatever lay in my way; meant bringing my atoms into such intimate contact with those of the obstacle that a profound chemical reaction—possibly a far-reaching explosion—would result, and blow myself and my apparatus out of all possible dimensions—into the Unknown. </span>
      <span id="f0418">This possibility had occurred to me again and again while I was making the machine; but then I had cheerfully accepted it as an unavoidable risk—one of the risks a man has got to take! </span>
      <span id="f0419">Now the risk was inevitable, I no longer saw it in the same cheerful light. </span>
      <span id="f0420">The fact is that, insensibly, the absolute strangeness of everything, the sickly jarring and swaying of the machine, above all, the feeling of prolonged falling, had absolutely upset my nerve. </span>
      <span id="f0421">I told myself that I could never stop, and with a gust of petulance I resolved to stop forthwith. </span>
      <span id="f0422">Like an impatient fool, I lugged over the lever, and incontinently the thing went reeling over, and I was flung headlong through the air.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0423">&#39;There was the sound of a clap of thunder in my ears. </span>
      <span id="f0424">I may have been stunned for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f0425">A pitiless hail was hissing round me, and I was sitting on soft turf in front of the overset machine. </span>
      <span id="f0426">Everything still seemed grey, but presently I remarked that the confusion in my ears was gone. </span>
      <span id="f0427">I looked round me. </span>
      <span id="f0428">I was on what seemed to be a little lawn in a garden, surrounded by rhododendron bushes, and I noticed that their mauve and purple blossoms were dropping in a shower under the beating of the hail-stones. </span>
      <span id="f0429">The rebounding, dancing hail hung in a cloud over the machine, and drove along the ground like smoke. </span>
      <span id="f0430">In a moment I was wet to the skin. </span>
      <span id="f0431">&#34;Fine hospitality,&#34; said I, &#34;to a man who has travelled innumerable years to see you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0432">&#39;Presently I thought what a fool I was to get wet. </span>
      <span id="f0433">I stood up and looked round me. </span>
      <span id="f0434">A colossal figure, carved apparently in some white stone, loomed indistinctly beyond the rhododendrons through the hazy downpour. </span>
      <span id="f0435">But all else of the world was invisible.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0436">&#39;My sensations would be hard to describe. </span>
      <span id="f0437">As the columns of hail grew thinner, I saw the white figure more distinctly. </span>
      <span id="f0438">It was very large, for a silver birch-tree touched its shoulder. </span>
      <span id="f0439">It was of white marble, in shape something like a winged sphinx, but the wings, instead of being carried vertically at the sides, were spread so that it seemed to hover. </span>
      <span id="f0440">The pedestal, it appeared to me, was of bronze, and was thick with verdigris. </span>
      <span id="f0441">It chanced that the face was towards me; the sightless eyes seemed to watch me; there was the faint shadow of a smile on the lips. </span>
      <span id="f0442">It was greatly weather-worn, and that imparted an unpleasant suggestion of disease. </span>
      <span id="f0443">I stood looking at it for a little space—half a minute, perhaps, or half an hour. </span>
      <span id="f0444">It seemed to advance and to recede as the hail drove before it denser or thinner. </span>
      <span id="f0445">At last I tore my eyes from it for a moment and saw that the hail curtain had worn threadbare, and that the sky was lightening with the promise of the sun.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0446">&#39;I looked up again at the crouching white shape, and the full temerity of my voyage came suddenly upon me. </span>
      <span id="f0447">What might appear when that hazy curtain was altogether withdrawn? </span>
      <span id="f0448">What might not have happened to men? </span>
      <span id="f0449">What if cruelty had grown into a common passion? </span>
      <span id="f0450">What if in this interval the race had lost its manliness and had developed into something inhuman, unsympathetic, and overwhelmingly powerful? </span>
      <span id="f0451">I might seem some old-world savage animal, only the more dreadful and disgusting for our common likeness—a foul creature to be incontinently slain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0452">&#39;Already I saw other vast shapes—huge buildings with intricate parapets and tall columns, with a wooded hill-side dimly creeping in upon me through the lessening storm. </span>
      <span id="f0453">I was seized with a panic fear. </span>
      <span id="f0454">I turned frantically to the Time Machine, and strove hard to readjust it. </span>
      <span id="f0455">As I did so the shafts of the sun smote through the thunderstorm. </span>
      <span id="f0456">The grey downpour was swept aside and vanished like the trailing garments of a ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0457">Above me, in the intense blue of the summer sky, some faint brown shreds of cloud whirled into nothingness. </span>
      <span id="f0458">The great buildings about me stood out clear and distinct, shining with the wet of the thunderstorm, and picked out in white by the unmelted hailstones piled along their courses. </span>
      <span id="f0459">I felt naked in a strange world. </span>
      <span id="f0460">I felt as perhaps a bird may feel in the clear air, knowing the hawk wings above and will swoop. </span>
      <span id="f0461">My fear grew to frenzy. </span>
      <span id="f0462">I took a breathing space, set my teeth, and again grappled fiercely, wrist and knee, with the machine. </span>
      <span id="f0463">It gave under my desperate onset and turned over. </span>
      <span id="f0464">It struck my chin violently. </span>
      <span id="f0465">One hand on the saddle, the other on the lever, I stood panting heavily in attitude to mount again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0466">&#39;But with this recovery of a prompt retreat my courage recovered. </span>
      <span id="f0467">I looked more curiously and less fearfully at this world of the remote future. </span>
      <span id="f0468">In a circular opening, high up in the wall of the nearer house, I saw a group of figures clad in rich soft robes. </span>
      <span id="f0469">They had seen me, and their faces were directed towards me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0470">&#39;Then I heard voices approaching me. </span>
      <span id="f0471">Coming through the bushes by the White Sphinx were the heads and shoulders of men running. </span>
      <span id="f0472">One of these emerged in a pathway leading straight to the little lawn upon which I stood with my machine. </span>
      <span id="f0473">He was a slight creature—perhaps four feet high—clad in a purple tunic, girdled at the waist with a leather belt. </span>
      <span id="f0474">Sandals or buskins—I could not clearly distinguish which—were on his feet; his legs were bare to the knees, and his head was bare. </span>
      <span id="f0475">Noticing that, I noticed for the first time how warm the air was.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0476">&#39;He struck me as being a very beautiful and graceful creature, but indescribably frail. </span>
      <span id="f0477">His flushed face reminded me of the more beautiful kind of consumptive—that hectic beauty of which we used to hear so much. </span>
      <span id="f0478">At the sight of him I suddenly regained confidence. </span>
      <span id="f0479">I took my hands from the machine.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>