<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0480">CHAPTER IV</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0481">&#39;In another moment we were standing face to face, I and this fragile thing out of futurity. </span>
      <span id="f0482">He came straight up to me and laughed into my eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0483">The absence from his bearing of any sign of fear struck me at once. </span>
      <span id="f0484">Then he turned to the two others who were following him and spoke to them in a strange and very sweet and liquid tongue.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0485">&#39;There were others coming, and presently a little group of perhaps eight or ten of these exquisite creatures were about me. </span>
      <span id="f0486">One of them addressed me. </span>
      <span id="f0487">It came into my head, oddly enough, that my voice was too harsh and deep for them. </span>
      <span id="f0488">So I shook my head, and, pointing to my ears, shook it again. </span>
      <span id="f0489">He came a step forward, hesitated, and then touched my hand. </span>
      <span id="f0490">Then I felt other soft little tentacles upon my back and shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f0491">They wanted to make sure I was real. </span>
      <span id="f0492">There was nothing in this at all alarming. </span>
      <span id="f0493">Indeed, there was something in these pretty little people that inspired confidence—a graceful gentleness, a certain childlike ease. </span>
      <span id="f0494">And besides, they looked so frail that I could fancy myself flinging the whole dozen of them about like nine-pins. </span>
      <span id="f0495">But I made a sudden motion to warn them when I saw their little pink hands feeling at the Time Machine. </span>
      <span id="f0496">Happily then, when it was not too late, I thought of a danger I had hitherto forgotten, and reaching over the bars of the machine I unscrewed the little levers that would set it in motion, and put these in my pocket. </span>
      <span id="f0497">Then I turned again to see what I could do in the way of communication.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0498">&#39;And then, looking more nearly into their features, I saw some further peculiarities in their Dresden-china type of prettiness. </span>
      <span id="f0499">Their hair, which was uniformly curly, came to a sharp end at the neck and cheek; there was not the faintest suggestion of it on the face, and their ears were singularly minute. </span>
      <span id="f0500">The mouths were small, with bright red, rather thin lips, and the little chins ran to a point. </span>
      <span id="f0501">The eyes were large and mild; and—this may seem egotism on my part—I fancied even that there was a certain lack of the interest I might have expected in them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0502">&#39;As they made no effort to communicate with me, but simply stood round me smiling and speaking in soft cooing notes to each other, I began the conversation. </span>
      <span id="f0503">I pointed to the Time Machine and to myself. </span>
      <span id="f0504">Then hesitating for a moment how to express time, I pointed to the sun. </span>
      <span id="f0505">At once a quaintly pretty little figure in chequered purple and white followed my gesture, and then astonished me by imitating the sound of thunder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0506">&#39;For a moment I was staggered, though the import of his gesture was plain enough. </span>
      <span id="f0507">The question had come into my mind abruptly: were these creatures fools? </span>
      <span id="f0508">You may hardly understand how it took me. </span>
      <span id="f0509">You see I had always anticipated that the people of the year Eight Hundred and Two Thousand odd would be incredibly in front of us in knowledge, art, everything. </span>
      <span id="f0510">Then one of them suddenly asked me a question that showed him to be on the intellectual level of one of our five-year-old children—asked me, in fact, if I had come from the sun in a thunderstorm! </span>
      <span id="f0511">It let loose the judgment I had suspended upon their clothes, their frail light limbs, and fragile features. </span>
      <span id="f0512">A flow of disappointment rushed across my mind. </span>
      <span id="f0513">For a moment I felt that I had built the Time Machine in vain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0514">&#39;I nodded, pointed to the sun, and gave them such a vivid rendering of a thunderclap as startled them. </span>
      <span id="f0515">They all withdrew a pace or so and bowed. </span>
      <span id="f0516">Then came one laughing towards me, carrying a chain of beautiful flowers altogether new to me, and put it about my neck. </span>
      <span id="f0517">The idea was received with melodious applause; and presently they were all running to and fro for flowers, and laughingly flinging them upon me until I was almost smothered with blossom. </span>
      <span id="f0518">You who have never seen the like can scarcely imagine what delicate and wonderful flowers countless years of culture had created. </span>
      <span id="f0519">Then someone suggested that their plaything should be exhibited in the nearest building, and so I was led past the sphinx of white marble, which had seemed to watch me all the while with a smile at my astonishment, towards a vast grey edifice of fretted stone. </span>
      <span id="f0520">As I went with them the memory of my confident anticipations of a profoundly grave and intellectual posterity came, with irresistible merriment, to my mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0521">&#39;The building had a huge entry, and was altogether of colossal dimensions. </span>
      <span id="f0522">I was naturally most occupied with the growing crowd of little people, and with the big open portals that yawned before me shadowy and mysterious. </span>
      <span id="f0523">My general impression of the world I saw over their heads was a tangled waste of beautiful bushes and flowers, a long neglected and yet weedless garden. </span>
      <span id="f0524">I saw a number of tall spikes of strange white flowers, measuring a foot perhaps across the spread of the waxen petals. </span>
      <span id="f0525">They grew scattered, as if wild, among the variegated shrubs, but, as I say, I did not examine them closely at this time. </span>
      <span id="f0526">The Time Machine was left deserted on the turf among the rhododendrons.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0527">&#39;The arch of the doorway was richly carved, but naturally I did not observe the carving very narrowly, though I fancied I saw suggestions of old Phoenician decorations as I passed through, and it struck me that they were very badly broken and weather-worn. </span>
      <span id="f0528">Several more brightly clad people met me in the doorway, and so we entered, I, dressed in dingy nineteenth-century garments, looking grotesque enough, garlanded with flowers, and surrounded by an eddying mass of bright, soft-colored robes and shining white limbs, in a melodious whirl of laughter and laughing speech.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0529">&#39;The big doorway opened into a proportionately great hall hung with brown. </span>
      <span id="f0530">The roof was in shadow, and the windows, partially glazed with coloured glass and partially unglazed, admitted a tempered light. </span>
      <span id="f0531">The floor was made up of huge blocks of some very hard white metal, not plates nor slabs—blocks, and it was so much worn, as I judged by the going to and fro of past generations, as to be deeply channelled along the more frequented ways. </span>
      <span id="f0532">Transverse to the length were innumerable tables made of slabs of polished stone, raised perhaps a foot from the floor, and upon these were heaps of fruits. </span>
      <span id="f0533">Some I recognized as a kind of hypertrophied raspberry and orange, but for the most part they were strange.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0534">&#39;Between the tables was scattered a great number of cushions. </span>
      <span id="f0535">Upon these my conductors seated themselves, signing for me to do likewise. </span>
      <span id="f0536">With a pretty absence of ceremony they began to eat the fruit with their hands, flinging peel and stalks, and so forth, into the round openings in the sides of the tables. </span>
      <span id="f0537">I was not loath to follow their example, for I felt thirsty and hungry. </span>
      <span id="f0538">As I did so I surveyed the hall at my leisure.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0539">&#39;And perhaps the thing that struck me most was its dilapidated look. </span>
      <span id="f0540">The stained-glass windows, which displayed only a geometrical pattern, were broken in many places, and the curtains that hung across the lower end were thick with dust. </span>
      <span id="f0541">And it caught my eye that the corner of the marble table near me was fractured. </span>
      <span id="f0542">Nevertheless, the general effect was extremely rich and picturesque. </span>
      <span id="f0543">There were, perhaps, a couple of hundred people dining in the hall, and most of them, seated as near to me as they could come, were watching me with interest, their little eyes shining over the fruit they were eating. </span>
      <span id="f0544">All were clad in the same soft and yet strong, silky material.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0545">&#39;Fruit, by the by, was all their diet. </span>
      <span id="f0546">These people of the remote future were strict vegetarians, and while I was with them, in spite of some carnal cravings, I had to be frugivorous also. </span>
      <span id="f0547">Indeed, I found afterwards that horses, cattle, sheep, dogs, had followed the Ichthyosaurus into extinction. </span>
      <span id="f0548">But the fruits were very delightful; one, in particular, that seemed to be in season all the time I was there—a floury thing in a three-sided husk—was especially good, and I made it my staple. </span>
      <span id="f0549">At first I was puzzled by all these strange fruits, and by the strange flowers I saw, but later I began to perceive their import.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0550">&#39;However, I am telling you of my fruit dinner in the distant future now. </span>
      <span id="f0551">So soon as my appetite was a little checked, I determined to make a resolute attempt to learn the speech of these new men of mine. </span>
      <span id="f0552">Clearly that was the next thing to do. </span>
      <span id="f0553">The fruits seemed a convenient thing to begin upon, and holding one of these up I began a series of interrogative sounds and gestures. </span>
      <span id="f0554">I had some considerable difficulty in conveying my meaning. </span>
      <span id="f0555">At first my efforts met with a stare of surprise or inextinguishable laughter, but presently a fair-haired little creature seemed to grasp my intention and repeated a name. </span>
      <span id="f0556">They had to chatter and explain the business at great length to each other, and my first attempts to make the exquisite little sounds of their language caused an immense amount of amusement. </span>
      <span id="f0557">However, I felt like a schoolmaster amidst children, and persisted, and presently I had a score of noun substantives at least at my command; and then I got to demonstrative pronouns, and even the verb &#34;to eat.&#34; But it was slow work, and the little people soon tired and wanted to get away from my interrogations, so I determined, rather of necessity, to let them give their lessons in little doses when they felt inclined. </span>
      <span id="f0558">And very little doses I found they were before long, for I never met people more indolent or more easily fatigued.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0559">&#39;A queer thing I soon discovered about my little hosts, and that was their lack of interest. </span>
      <span id="f0560">They would come to me with eager cries of astonishment, like children, but like children they would soon stop examining me and wander away after some other toy. </span>
      <span id="f0561">The dinner and my conversational beginnings ended, I noted for the first time that almost all those who had surrounded me at first were gone. </span>
      <span id="f0562">It is odd, too, how speedily I came to disregard these little people. </span>
      <span id="f0563">I went out through the portal into the sunlit world again as soon as my hunger was satisfied. </span>
      <span id="f0564">I was continually meeting more of these men of the future, who would follow me a little distance, chatter and laugh about me, and, having smiled and gesticulated in a friendly way, leave me again to my own devices.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0565">&#39;The calm of evening was upon the world as I emerged from the great hall, and the scene was lit by the warm glow of the setting sun. </span>
      <span id="f0566">At first things were very confusing. </span>
      <span id="f0567">Everything was so entirely different from the world I had known—even the flowers. </span>
      <span id="f0568">The big building I had left was situated on the slope of a broad river valley, but the Thames had shifted perhaps a mile from its present position. </span>
      <span id="f0569">I resolved to mount to the summit of a crest, perhaps a mile and a half away, from which I could get a wider view of this our planet in the year Eight Hundred and Two Thousand Seven Hundred and One A.D. </span>
      <span id="f0570">For that, I should explain, was the date the little dials of my machine recorded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0571">&#39;As I walked I was watching for every impression that could possibly help to explain the condition of ruinous splendour in which I found the world—for ruinous it was. </span>
      <span id="f0572">A little way up the hill, for instance, was a great heap of granite, bound together by masses of aluminium, a vast labyrinth of precipitous walls and crumpled heaps, amidst which were thick heaps of very beautiful pagoda-like plants—nettles possibly—but wonderfully tinted with brown about the leaves, and incapable of stinging. </span>
      <span id="f0573">It was evidently the derelict remains of some vast structure, to what end built I could not determine. </span>
      <span id="f0574">It was here that I was destined, at a later date, to have a very strange experience—the first intimation of a still stranger discovery—but of that I will speak in its proper place.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0575">&#39;Looking round with a sudden thought, from a terrace on which I rested for a while, I realized that there were no small houses to be seen. </span>
      <span id="f0576">Apparently the single house, and possibly even the household, had vanished. </span>
      <span id="f0577">Here and there among the greenery were palace-like buildings, but the house and the cottage, which form such characteristic features of our own English landscape, had disappeared.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0578">&#39;&#34;Communism,&#34; said I to myself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0579">&#39;And on the heels of that came another thought. </span>
      <span id="f0580">I looked at the half-dozen little figures that were following me. </span>
      <span id="f0581">Then, in a flash, I perceived that all had the same form of costume, the same soft hairless visage, and the same girlish rotundity of limb. </span>
      <span id="f0582">It may seem strange, perhaps, that I had not noticed this before. </span>
      <span id="f0583">But everything was so strange. </span>
      <span id="f0584">Now, I saw the fact plainly enough. </span>
      <span id="f0585">In costume, and in all the differences of texture and bearing that now mark off the sexes from each other, these people of the future were alike. </span>
      <span id="f0586">And the children seemed to my eyes to be but the miniatures of their parents. </span>
      <span id="f0587">I judged, then, that the children of that time were extremely precocious, physically at least, and I found afterwards abundant verification of my opinion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0588">&#39;Seeing the ease and security in which these people were living, I felt that this close resemblance of the sexes was after all what one would expect; for the strength of a man and the softness of a woman, the institution of the family, and the differentiation of occupations are mere militant necessities of an age of physical force; where population is balanced and abundant, much childbearing becomes an evil rather than a blessing to the State; where violence comes but rarely and off-spring are secure, there is less necessity—indeed there is no necessity—for an efficient family, and the specialization of the sexes with reference to their children&#39;s needs disappears. </span>
      <span id="f0589">We see some beginnings of this even in our own time, and in this future age it was complete. </span>
      <span id="f0590">This, I must remind you, was my speculation at the time. </span>
      <span id="f0591">Later, I was to appreciate how far it fell short of the reality.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0592">&#39;While I was musing upon these things, my attention was attracted by a pretty little structure, like a well under a cupola. </span>
      <span id="f0593">I thought in a transitory way of the oddness of wells still existing, and then resumed the thread of my speculations. </span>
      <span id="f0594">There were no large buildings towards the top of the hill, and as my walking powers were evidently miraculous, I was presently left alone for the first time. </span>
      <span id="f0595">With a strange sense of freedom and adventure I pushed on up to the crest.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0596">&#39;There I found a seat of some yellow metal that I did not recognize, corroded in places with a kind of pinkish rust and half smothered in soft moss, the arm-rests cast and filed into the resemblance of griffins&#39; heads. </span>
      <span id="f0597">I sat down on it, and I surveyed the broad view of our old world under the sunset of that long day. </span>
      <span id="f0598">It was as sweet and fair a view as I have ever seen. </span>
      <span id="f0599">The sun had already gone below the horizon and the west was flaming gold, touched with some horizontal bars of purple and crimson. </span>
      <span id="f0600">Below was the valley of the Thames, in which the river lay like a band of burnished steel. </span>
      <span id="f0601">I have already spoken of the great palaces dotted about among the variegated greenery, some in ruins and some still occupied. </span>
      <span id="f0602">Here and there rose a white or silvery figure in the waste garden of the earth, here and there came the sharp vertical line of some cupola or obelisk. </span>
      <span id="f0603">There were no hedges, no signs of proprietary rights, no evidences of agriculture; the whole earth had become a garden.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0604">&#39;So watching, I began to put my interpretation upon the things I had seen, and as it shaped itself to me that evening, my interpretation was something in this way. </span>
      <span id="f0605">(Afterwards I found I had got only a half-truth—or only a glimpse of one facet of the truth.)</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0606">&#39;It seemed to me that I had happened upon humanity upon the wane. </span>
      <span id="f0607">The ruddy sunset set me thinking of the sunset of mankind. </span>
      <span id="f0608">For the first time I began to realize an odd consequence of the social effort in which we are at present engaged. </span>
      <span id="f0609">And yet, come to think, it is a logical consequence enough. </span>
      <span id="f0610">Strength is the outcome of need; security sets a premium on feebleness. </span>
      <span id="f0611">The work of ameliorating the conditions of life—the true civilizing process that makes life more and more secure—had gone steadily on to a climax. </span>
      <span id="f0612">One triumph of a united humanity over Nature had followed another. </span>
      <span id="f0613">Things that are now mere dreams had become projects deliberately put in hand and carried forward. </span>
      <span id="f0614">And the harvest was what I saw!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0615">&#39;After all, the sanitation and the agriculture of to-day are still in the rudimentary stage. </span>
      <span id="f0616">The science of our time has attacked but a little department of the field of human disease, but even so, it spreads its operations very steadily and persistently. </span>
      <span id="f0617">Our agriculture and horticulture destroy a weed just here and there and cultivate perhaps a score or so of wholesome plants, leaving the greater number to fight out a balance as they can. </span>
      <span id="f0618">We improve our favourite plants and animals—and how few they are—gradually by selective breeding; now a new and better peach, now a seedless grape, now a sweeter and larger flower, now a more convenient breed of cattle. </span>
      <span id="f0619">We improve them gradually, because our ideals are vague and tentative, and our knowledge is very limited; because Nature, too, is shy and slow in our clumsy hands. </span>
      <span id="f0620">Some day all this will be better organized, and still better. </span>
      <span id="f0621">That is the drift of the current in spite of the eddies. </span>
      <span id="f0622">The whole world will be intelligent, educated, and co-operating; things will move faster and faster towards the subjugation of Nature. </span>
      <span id="f0623">In the end, wisely and carefully we shall readjust the balance of animal and vegetable life to suit our human needs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0624">&#39;This adjustment, I say, must have been done, and done well; done indeed for all Time, in the space of Time across which my machine had leaped. </span>
      <span id="f0625">The air was free from gnats, the earth from weeds or fungi; everywhere were fruits and sweet and delightful flowers; brilliant butterflies flew hither and thither. </span>
      <span id="f0626">The ideal of preventive medicine was attained. </span>
      <span id="f0627">Diseases had been stamped out. </span>
      <span id="f0628">I saw no evidence of any contagious diseases during all my stay. </span>
      <span id="f0629">And I shall have to tell you later that even the processes of putrefaction and decay had been profoundly affected by these changes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0630">&#39;Social triumphs, too, had been effected. </span>
      <span id="f0631">I saw mankind housed in splendid shelters, gloriously clothed, and as yet I had found them engaged in no toil. </span>
      <span id="f0632">There were no signs of struggle, neither social nor economical struggle. </span>
      <span id="f0633">The shop, the advertisement, traffic, all that commerce which constitutes the body of our world, was gone. </span>
      <span id="f0634">It was natural on that golden evening that I should jump at the idea of a social paradise. </span>
      <span id="f0635">The difficulty of increasing population had been met, I guessed, and population had ceased to increase.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0636">&#39;But with this change in condition comes inevitably adaptations to the change. </span>
      <span id="f0637">What, unless biological science is a mass of errors, is the cause of human intelligence and vigour? </span>
      <span id="f0638">Hardship and freedom: conditions under which the active, strong, and subtle survive and the weaker go to the wall; conditions that put a premium upon the loyal alliance of capable men, upon self-restraint, patience, and decision. </span>
      <span id="f0639">And the institution of the family, and the emotions that arise therein, the fierce jealousy, the tenderness for offspring, parental self-devotion, all found their justification and support in the imminent dangers of the young. </span>
      <span id="f0640">Now, where are these imminent dangers? </span>
      <span id="f0641">There is a sentiment arising, and it will grow, against connubial jealousy, against fierce maternity, against passion of all sorts; unnecessary things now, and things that make us uncomfortable, savage survivals, discords in a refined and pleasant life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0642">&#39;I thought of the physical slightness of the people, their lack of intelligence, and those big abundant ruins, and it strengthened my belief in a perfect conquest of Nature. </span>
      <span id="f0643">For after the battle comes Quiet. </span>
      <span id="f0644">Humanity had been strong, energetic, and intelligent, and had used all its abundant vitality to alter the conditions under which it lived. </span>
      <span id="f0645">And now came the reaction of the altered conditions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0646">&#39;Under the new conditions of perfect comfort and security, that restless energy, that with us is strength, would become weakness. </span>
      <span id="f0647">Even in our own time certain tendencies and desires, once necessary to survival, are a constant source of failure. </span>
      <span id="f0648">Physical courage and the love of battle, for instance, are no great help—may even be hindrances—to a civilized man. </span>
      <span id="f0649">And in a state of physical balance and security, power, intellectual as well as physical, would be out of place. </span>
      <span id="f0650">For countless years I judged there had been no danger of war or solitary violence, no danger from wild beasts, no wasting disease to require strength of constitution, no need of toil. </span>
      <span id="f0651">For such a life, what we should call the weak are as well equipped as the strong, are indeed no longer weak. </span>
      <span id="f0652">Better equipped indeed they are, for the strong would be fretted by an energy for which there was no outlet. </span>
      <span id="f0653">No doubt the exquisite beauty of the buildings I saw was the outcome of the last surgings of the now purposeless energy of mankind before it settled down into perfect harmony with the conditions under which it lived—the flourish of that triumph which began the last great peace. </span>
      <span id="f0654">This has ever been the fate of energy in security; it takes to art and to eroticism, and then come languor and decay.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0655">&#39;Even this artistic impetus would at last die away—had almost died in the Time I saw. </span>
      <span id="f0656">To adorn themselves with flowers, to dance, to sing in the sunlight: so much was left of the artistic spirit, and no more. </span>
      <span id="f0657">Even that would fade in the end into a contented inactivity. </span>
      <span id="f0658">We are kept keen on the grindstone of pain and necessity, and, it seemed to me, that here was that hateful grindstone broken at last!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0659">&#39;As I stood there in the gathering dark I thought that in this simple explanation I had mastered the problem of the world—mastered the whole secret of these delicious people. </span>
      <span id="f0660">Possibly the checks they had devised for the increase of population had succeeded too well, and their numbers had rather diminished than kept stationary. </span>
      <span id="f0661">That would account for the abandoned ruins. </span>
      <span id="f0662">Very simple was my explanation, and plausible enough—as most wrong theories are!</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>