<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER V</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0663">CHAPTER V</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0664">&#39;As I stood there musing over this too perfect triumph of man, the full moon, yellow and gibbous, came up out of an overflow of silver light in the north-east. </span>
      <span id="f0665">The bright little figures ceased to move about below, a noiseless owl flitted by, and I shivered with the chill of the night. </span>
      <span id="f0666">I determined to descend and find where I could sleep.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0667">&#39;I looked for the building I knew. </span>
      <span id="f0668">Then my eye travelled along to the figure of the White Sphinx upon the pedestal of bronze, growing distinct as the light of the rising moon grew brighter. </span>
      <span id="f0669">I could see the silver birch against it. </span>
      <span id="f0670">There was the tangle of rhododendron bushes, black in the pale light, and there was the little lawn. </span>
      <span id="f0671">I looked at the lawn again. </span>
      <span id="f0672">A queer doubt chilled my complacency. </span>
      <span id="f0673">&#34;No,&#34; said I stoutly to myself, &#34;that was not the lawn.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0674">&#39;But it was the lawn. </span>
      <span id="f0675">For the white leprous face of the sphinx was towards it. </span>
      <span id="f0676">Can you imagine what I felt as this conviction came home to me? </span>
      <span id="f0677">But you cannot. </span>
      <span id="f0678">The Time Machine was gone!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0679">&#39;At once, like a lash across the face, came the possibility of losing my own age, of being left helpless in this strange new world. </span>
      <span id="f0680">The bare thought of it was an actual physical sensation. </span>
      <span id="f0681">I could feel it grip me at the throat and stop my breathing. </span>
      <span id="f0682">In another moment I was in a passion of fear and running with great leaping strides down the slope. </span>
      <span id="f0683">Once I fell headlong and cut my face; I lost no time in stanching the blood, but jumped up and ran on, with a warm trickle down my cheek and chin. </span>
      <span id="f0684">All the time I ran I was saying to myself: &#34;They have moved it a little, pushed it under the bushes out of the way.&#34; Nevertheless, I ran with all my might. </span>
      <span id="f0685">All the time, with the certainty that sometimes comes with excessive dread, I knew that such assurance was folly, knew instinctively that the machine was removed out of my reach. </span>
      <span id="f0686">My breath came with pain. </span>
      <span id="f0687">I suppose I covered the whole distance from the hill crest to the little lawn, two miles perhaps, in ten minutes. </span>
      <span id="f0688">And I am not a young man. </span>
      <span id="f0689">I cursed aloud, as I ran, at my confident folly in leaving the machine, wasting good breath thereby. </span>
      <span id="f0690">I cried aloud, and none answered. </span>
      <span id="f0691">Not a creature seemed to be stirring in that moonlit world.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0692">&#39;When I reached the lawn my worst fears were realized. </span>
      <span id="f0693">Not a trace of the thing was to be seen. </span>
      <span id="f0694">I felt faint and cold when I faced the empty space among the black tangle of bushes. </span>
      <span id="f0695">I ran round it furiously, as if the thing might be hidden in a corner, and then stopped abruptly, with my hands clutching my hair. </span>
      <span id="f0696">Above me towered the sphinx, upon the bronze pedestal, white, shining, leprous, in the light of the rising moon. </span>
      <span id="f0697">It seemed to smile in mockery of my dismay.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0698">&#39;I might have consoled myself by imagining the little people had put the mechanism in some shelter for me, had I not felt assured of their physical and intellectual inadequacy. </span>
      <span id="f0699">That is what dismayed me: the sense of some hitherto unsuspected power, through whose intervention my invention had vanished. </span>
      <span id="f0700">Yet, for one thing I felt assured: unless some other age had produced its exact duplicate, the machine could not have moved in time. </span>
      <span id="f0701">The attachment of the levers—I will show you the method later—prevented any one from tampering with it in that way when they were removed. </span>
      <span id="f0702">It had moved, and was hid, only in space. </span>
      <span id="f0703">But then, where could it be?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0704">&#39;I think I must have had a kind of frenzy. </span>
      <span id="f0705">I remember running violently in and out among the moonlit bushes all round the sphinx, and startling some white animal that, in the dim light, I took for a small deer. </span>
      <span id="f0706">I remember, too, late that night, beating the bushes with my clenched fist until my knuckles were gashed and bleeding from the broken twigs. </span>
      <span id="f0707">Then, sobbing and raving in my anguish of mind, I went down to the great building of stone. </span>
      <span id="f0708">The big hall was dark, silent, and deserted. </span>
      <span id="f0709">I slipped on the uneven floor, and fell over one of the malachite tables, almost breaking my shin. </span>
      <span id="f0710">I lit a match and went on past the dusty curtains, of which I have told you.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0711">&#39;There I found a second great hall covered with cushions, upon which, perhaps, a score or so of the little people were sleeping. </span>
      <span id="f0712">I have no doubt they found my second appearance strange enough, coming suddenly out of the quiet darkness with inarticulate noises and the splutter and flare of a match. </span>
      <span id="f0713">For they had forgotten about matches. </span>
      <span id="f0714">&#34;Where is my Time Machine?&#34; I began, bawling like an angry child, laying hands upon them and shaking them up together. </span>
      <span id="f0715">It must have been very queer to them. </span>
      <span id="f0716">Some laughed, most of them looked sorely frightened. </span>
      <span id="f0717">When I saw them standing round me, it came into my head that I was doing as foolish a thing as it was possible for me to do under the circumstances, in trying to revive the sensation of fear. </span>
      <span id="f0718">For, reasoning from their daylight behaviour, I thought that fear must be forgotten.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0719">&#39;Abruptly, I dashed down the match, and, knocking one of the people over in my course, went blundering across the big dining-hall again, out under the moonlight. </span>
      <span id="f0720">I heard cries of terror and their little feet running and stumbling this way and that. </span>
      <span id="f0721">I do not remember all I did as the moon crept up the sky. </span>
      <span id="f0722">I suppose it was the unexpected nature of my loss that maddened me. </span>
      <span id="f0723">I felt hopelessly cut off from my own kind—a strange animal in an unknown world. </span>
      <span id="f0724">I must have raved to and fro, screaming and crying upon God and Fate. </span>
      <span id="f0725">I have a memory of horrible fatigue, as the long night of despair wore away; of looking in this impossible place and that; of groping among moon-lit ruins and touching strange creatures in the black shadows; at last, of lying on the ground near the sphinx and weeping with absolute wretchedness. </span>
      <span id="f0726">I had nothing left but misery. </span>
      <span id="f0727">Then I slept, and when I woke again it was full day, and a couple of sparrows were hopping round me on the turf within reach of my arm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0728">&#39;I sat up in the freshness of the morning, trying to remember how I had got there, and why I had such a profound sense of desertion and despair. </span>
      <span id="f0729">Then things came clear in my mind. </span>
      <span id="f0730">With the plain, reasonable daylight, I could look my circumstances fairly in the face. </span>
      <span id="f0731">I saw the wild folly of my frenzy overnight, and I could reason with myself. </span>
      <span id="f0732">&#34;Suppose the worst?&#34; I said. </span>
      <span id="f0733">&#34;Suppose the machine altogether lost—perhaps destroyed? </span>
      <span id="f0734">It behoves me to be calm and patient, to learn the way of the people, to get a clear idea of the method of my loss, and the means of getting materials and tools; so that in the end, perhaps, I may make another.&#34; That would be my only hope, perhaps, but better than despair. </span>
      <span id="f0735">And, after all, it was a beautiful and curious world.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0736">&#39;But probably, the machine had only been taken away. </span>
      <span id="f0737">Still, I must be calm and patient, find its hiding-place, and recover it by force or cunning. </span>
      <span id="f0738">And with that I scrambled to my feet and looked about me, wondering where I could bathe. </span>
      <span id="f0739">I felt weary, stiff, and travel-soiled. </span>
      <span id="f0740">The freshness of the morning made me desire an equal freshness. </span>
      <span id="f0741">I had exhausted my emotion. </span>
      <span id="f0742">Indeed, as I went about my business, I found myself wondering at my intense excitement overnight. </span>
      <span id="f0743">I made a careful examination of the ground about the little lawn. </span>
      <span id="f0744">I wasted some time in futile questionings, conveyed, as well as I was able, to such of the little people as came by. </span>
      <span id="f0745">They all failed to understand my gestures; some were simply stolid, some thought it was a jest and laughed at me. </span>
      <span id="f0746">I had the hardest task in the world to keep my hands off their pretty laughing faces. </span>
      <span id="f0747">It was a foolish impulse, but the devil begotten of fear and blind anger was ill curbed and still eager to take advantage of my perplexity. </span>
      <span id="f0748">The turf gave better counsel. </span>
      <span id="f0749">I found a groove ripped in it, about midway between the pedestal of the sphinx and the marks of my feet where, on arrival, I had struggled with the overturned machine. </span>
      <span id="f0750">There were other signs of removal about, with queer narrow footprints like those I could imagine made by a sloth. </span>
      <span id="f0751">This directed my closer attention to the pedestal. </span>
      <span id="f0752">It was, as I think I have said, of bronze. </span>
      <span id="f0753">It was not a mere block, but highly decorated with deep framed panels on either side. </span>
      <span id="f0754">I went and rapped at these. </span>
      <span id="f0755">The pedestal was hollow. </span>
      <span id="f0756">Examining the panels with care I found them discontinuous with the frames. </span>
      <span id="f0757">There were no handles or keyholes, but possibly the panels, if they were doors, as I supposed, opened from within. </span>
      <span id="f0758">One thing was clear enough to my mind. </span>
      <span id="f0759">It took no very great mental effort to infer that my Time Machine was inside that pedestal. </span>
      <span id="f0760">But how it got there was a different problem.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0761">&#39;I saw the heads of two orange-clad people coming through the bushes and under some blossom-covered apple-trees towards me. </span>
      <span id="f0762">I turned smiling to them and beckoned them to me. </span>
      <span id="f0763">They came, and then, pointing to the bronze pedestal, I tried to intimate my wish to open it. </span>
      <span id="f0764">But at my first gesture towards this they behaved very oddly. </span>
      <span id="f0765">I don&#39;t know how to convey their expression to you. </span>
      <span id="f0766">Suppose you were to use a grossly improper gesture to a delicate-minded woman—it is how she would look. </span>
      <span id="f0767">They went off as if they had received the last possible insult. </span>
      <span id="f0768">I tried a sweet-looking little chap in white next, with exactly the same result. </span>
      <span id="f0769">Somehow, his manner made me feel ashamed of myself. </span>
      <span id="f0770">But, as you know, I wanted the Time Machine, and I tried him once more. </span>
      <span id="f0771">As he turned off, like the others, my temper got the better of me. </span>
      <span id="f0772">In three strides I was after him, had him by the loose part of his robe round the neck, and began dragging him towards the sphinx. </span>
      <span id="f0773">Then I saw the horror and repugnance of his face, and all of a sudden I let him go.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0774">&#39;But I was not beaten yet. </span>
      <span id="f0775">I banged with my fist at the bronze panels. </span>
      <span id="f0776">I thought I heard something stir inside—to be explicit, I thought I heard a sound like a chuckle—but I must have been mistaken. </span>
      <span id="f0777">Then I got a big pebble from the river, and came and hammered till I had flattened a coil in the decorations, and the verdigris came off in powdery flakes. </span>
      <span id="f0778">The delicate little people must have heard me hammering in gusty outbreaks a mile away on either hand, but nothing came of it. </span>
      <span id="f0779">I saw a crowd of them upon the slopes, looking furtively at me. </span>
      <span id="f0780">At last, hot and tired, I sat down to watch the place. </span>
      <span id="f0781">But I was too restless to watch long; I am too Occidental for a long vigil. </span>
      <span id="f0782">I could work at a problem for years, but to wait inactive for twenty-four hours—that is another matter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0783">&#39;I got up after a time, and began walking aimlessly through the bushes towards the hill again. </span>
      <span id="f0784">&#34;Patience,&#34; said I to myself. </span>
      <span id="f0785">&#34;If you want your machine again you must leave that sphinx alone. </span>
      <span id="f0786">If they mean to take your machine away, it&#39;s little good your wrecking their bronze panels, and if they don&#39;t, you will get it back as soon as you can ask for it. </span>
      <span id="f0787">To sit among all those unknown things before a puzzle like that is hopeless. </span>
      <span id="f0788">That way lies monomania. </span>
      <span id="f0789">Face this world. </span>
      <span id="f0790">Learn its ways, watch it, be careful of too hasty guesses at its meaning. </span>
      <span id="f0791">In the end you will find clues to it all.&#34; Then suddenly the humour of the situation came into my mind: the thought of the years I had spent in study and toil to get into the future age, and now my passion of anxiety to get out of it. </span>
      <span id="f0792">I had made myself the most complicated and the most hopeless trap that ever a man devised. </span>
      <span id="f0793">Although it was at my own expense, I could not help myself. </span>
      <span id="f0794">I laughed aloud.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0795">&#39;Going through the big palace, it seemed to me that the little people avoided me. </span>
      <span id="f0796">It may have been my fancy, or it may have had something to do with my hammering at the gates of bronze. </span>
      <span id="f0797">Yet I felt tolerably sure of the avoidance. </span>
      <span id="f0798">I was careful, however, to show no concern and to abstain from any pursuit of them, and in the course of a day or two things got back to the old footing. </span>
      <span id="f0799">I made what progress I could in the language, and in addition I pushed my explorations here and there. </span>
      <span id="f0800">Either I missed some subtle point or their language was excessively simple—almost exclusively composed of concrete substantives and verbs. </span>
      <span id="f0801">There seemed to be few, if any, abstract terms, or little use of figurative language. </span>
      <span id="f0802">Their sentences were usually simple and of two words, and I failed to convey or understand any but the simplest propositions. </span>
      <span id="f0803">I determined to put the thought of my Time Machine and the mystery of the bronze doors under the sphinx as much as possible in a corner of memory, until my growing knowledge would lead me back to them in a natural way. </span>
      <span id="f0804">Yet a certain feeling, you may understand, tethered me in a circle of a few miles round the point of my arrival.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0805">&#39;So far as I could see, all the world displayed the same exuberant richness as the Thames valley. </span>
      <span id="f0806">From every hill I climbed I saw the same abundance of splendid buildings, endlessly varied in material and style, the same clustering thickets of evergreens, the same blossom-laden trees and tree-ferns. </span>
      <span id="f0807">Here and there water shone like silver, and beyond, the land rose into blue undulating hills, and so faded into the serenity of the sky. </span>
      <span id="f0808">A peculiar feature, which presently attracted my attention, was the presence of certain circular wells, several, as it seemed to me, of a very great depth. </span>
      <span id="f0809">One lay by the path up the hill, which I had followed during my first walk. </span>
      <span id="f0810">Like the others, it was rimmed with bronze, curiously wrought, and protected by a little cupola from the rain. </span>
      <span id="f0811">Sitting by the side of these wells, and peering down into the shafted darkness, I could see no gleam of water, nor could I start any reflection with a lighted match. </span>
      <span id="f0812">But in all of them I heard a certain sound: a thud—thud—thud, like the beating of some big engine; and I discovered, from the flaring of my matches, that a steady current of air set down the shafts. </span>
      <span id="f0813">Further, I threw a scrap of paper into the throat of one, and, instead of fluttering slowly down, it was at once sucked swiftly out of sight.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0814">&#39;After a time, too, I came to connect these wells with tall towers standing here and there upon the slopes; for above them there was often just such a flicker in the air as one sees on a hot day above a sun-scorched beach. </span>
      <span id="f0815">Putting things together, I reached a strong suggestion of an extensive system of subterranean ventilation, whose true import it was difficult to imagine. </span>
      <span id="f0816">I was at first inclined to associate it with the sanitary apparatus of these people. </span>
      <span id="f0817">It was an obvious conclusion, but it was absolutely wrong.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0818">&#39;And here I must admit that I learned very little of drains and bells and modes of conveyance, and the like conveniences, during my time in this real future. </span>
      <span id="f0819">In some of these visions of Utopias and coming times which I have read, there is a vast amount of detail about building, and social arrangements, and so forth. </span>
      <span id="f0820">But while such details are easy enough to obtain when the whole world is contained in one&#39;s imagination, they are altogether inaccessible to a real traveller amid such realities as I found here. </span>
      <span id="f0821">Conceive the tale of London which a negro, fresh from Central Africa, would take back to his tribe! </span>
      <span id="f0822">What would he know of railway companies, of social movements, of telephone and telegraph wires, of the Parcels Delivery Company, and postal orders and the like? </span>
      <span id="f0823">Yet we, at least, should be willing enough to explain these things to him! </span>
      <span id="f0824">And even of what he knew, how much could he make his untravelled friend either apprehend or believe? </span>
      <span id="f0825">Then, think how narrow the gap between a negro and a white man of our own times, and how wide the interval between myself and these of the Golden Age! </span>
      <span id="f0826">I was sensible of much which was unseen, and which contributed to my comfort; but save for a general impression of automatic organization, I fear I can convey very little of the difference to your mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0827">&#39;In the matter of sepulture, for instance, I could see no signs of crematoria nor anything suggestive of tombs. </span>
      <span id="f0828">But it occurred to me that, possibly, there might be cemeteries (or crematoria) somewhere beyond the range of my explorings. </span>
      <span id="f0829">This, again, was a question I deliberately put to myself, and my curiosity was at first entirely defeated upon the point. </span>
      <span id="f0830">The thing puzzled me, and I was led to make a further remark, which puzzled me still more: that aged and infirm among this people there were none.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0831">&#39;I must confess that my satisfaction with my first theories of an automatic civilization and a decadent humanity did not long endure. </span>
      <span id="f0832">Yet I could think of no other. </span>
      <span id="f0833">Let me put my difficulties. </span>
      <span id="f0834">The several big palaces I had explored were mere living places, great dining-halls and sleeping apartments. </span>
      <span id="f0835">I could find no machinery, no appliances of any kind. </span>
      <span id="f0836">Yet these people were clothed in pleasant fabrics that must at times need renewal, and their sandals, though undecorated, were fairly complex specimens of metalwork. </span>
      <span id="f0837">Somehow such things must be made. </span>
      <span id="f0838">And the little people displayed no vestige of a creative tendency. </span>
      <span id="f0839">There were no shops, no workshops, no sign of importations among them. </span>
      <span id="f0840">They spent all their time in playing gently, in bathing in the river, in making love in a half-playful fashion, in eating fruit and sleeping. </span>
      <span id="f0841">I could not see how things were kept going.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0842">&#39;Then, again, about the Time Machine: something, I knew not what, had taken it into the hollow pedestal of the White Sphinx. </span>
      <span id="f0843">Why? </span>
      <span id="f0844">For the life of me I could not imagine. </span>
      <span id="f0845">Those waterless wells, too, those flickering pillars. </span>
      <span id="f0846">I felt I lacked a clue. </span>
      <span id="f0847">I felt—how shall I put it? </span>
      <span id="f0848">Suppose you found an inscription, with sentences here and there in excellent plain English, and interpolated therewith, others made up of words, of letters even, absolutely unknown to you? </span>
      <span id="f0849">Well, on the third day of my visit, that was how the world of Eight Hundred and Two Thousand Seven Hundred and One presented itself to me!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0850">&#39;That day, too, I made a friend—of a sort. </span>
      <span id="f0851">It happened that, as I was watching some of the little people bathing in a shallow, one of them was seized with cramp and began drifting downstream. </span>
      <span id="f0852">The main current ran rather swiftly, but not too strongly for even a moderate swimmer. </span>
      <span id="f0853">It will give you an idea, therefore, of the strange deficiency in these creatures, when I tell you that none made the slightest attempt to rescue the weakly crying little thing which was drowning before their eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0854">When I realized this, I hurriedly slipped off my clothes, and, wading in at a point lower down, I caught the poor mite and drew her safe to land. </span>
      <span id="f0855">A little rubbing of the limbs soon brought her round, and I had the satisfaction of seeing she was all right before I left her. </span>
      <span id="f0856">I had got to such a low estimate of her kind that I did not expect any gratitude from her. </span>
      <span id="f0857">In that, however, I was wrong.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0858">&#39;This happened in the morning. </span>
      <span id="f0859">In the afternoon I met my little woman, as I believe it was, as I was returning towards my centre from an exploration, and she received me with cries of delight and presented me with a big garland of flowers—evidently made for me and me alone. </span>
      <span id="f0860">The thing took my imagination. </span>
      <span id="f0861">Very possibly I had been feeling desolate. </span>
      <span id="f0862">At any rate I did my best to display my appreciation of the gift. </span>
      <span id="f0863">We were soon seated together in a little stone arbour, engaged in conversation, chiefly of smiles. </span>
      <span id="f0864">The creature&#39;s friendliness affected me exactly as a child&#39;s might have done. </span>
      <span id="f0865">We passed each other flowers, and she kissed my hands. </span>
      <span id="f0866">I did the same to hers. </span>
      <span id="f0867">Then I tried talk, and found that her name was Weena, which, though I don&#39;t know what it meant, somehow seemed appropriate enough. </span>
      <span id="f0868">That was the beginning of a queer friendship which lasted a week, and ended—as I will tell you!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0869">&#39;She was exactly like a child. </span>
      <span id="f0870">She wanted to be with me always. </span>
      <span id="f0871">She tried to follow me everywhere, and on my next journey out and about it went to my heart to tire her down, and leave her at last, exhausted and calling after me rather plaintively. </span>
      <span id="f0872">But the problems of the world had to be mastered. </span>
      <span id="f0873">I had not, I said to myself, come into the future to carry on a miniature flirtation. </span>
      <span id="f0874">Yet her distress when I left her was very great, her expostulations at the parting were sometimes frantic, and I think, altogether, I had as much trouble as comfort from her devotion. </span>
      <span id="f0875">Nevertheless she was, somehow, a very great comfort. </span>
      <span id="f0876">I thought it was mere childish affection that made her cling to me. </span>
      <span id="f0877">Until it was too late, I did not clearly know what I had inflicted upon her when I left her. </span>
      <span id="f0878">Nor until it was too late did I clearly understand what she was to me. </span>
      <span id="f0879">For, by merely seeming fond of me, and showing in her weak, futile way that she cared for me, the little doll of a creature presently gave my return to the neighbourhood of the White Sphinx almost the feeling of coming home; and I would watch for her tiny figure of white and gold so soon as I came over the hill.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0880">&#39;It was from her, too, that I learned that fear had not yet left the world. </span>
      <span id="f0881">She was fearless enough in the daylight, and she had the oddest confidence in me; for once, in a foolish moment, I made threatening grimaces at her, and she simply laughed at them. </span>
      <span id="f0882">But she dreaded the dark, dreaded shadows, dreaded black things. </span>
      <span id="f0883">Darkness to her was the one thing dreadful. </span>
      <span id="f0884">It was a singularly passionate emotion, and it set me thinking and observing. </span>
      <span id="f0885">I discovered then, among other things, that these little people gathered into the great houses after dark, and slept in droves. </span>
      <span id="f0886">To enter upon them without a light was to put them into a tumult of apprehension. </span>
      <span id="f0887">I never found one out of doors, or one sleeping alone within doors, after dark. </span>
      <span id="f0888">Yet I was still such a blockhead that I missed the lesson of that fear, and in spite of Weena&#39;s distress I insisted upon sleeping away from these slumbering multitudes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0889">&#39;It troubled her greatly, but in the end her odd affection for me triumphed, and for five of the nights of our acquaintance, including the last night of all, she slept with her head pillowed on my arm. </span>
      <span id="f0890">But my story slips away from me as I speak of her. </span>
      <span id="f0891">It must have been the night before her rescue that I was awakened about dawn. </span>
      <span id="f0892">I had been restless, dreaming most disagreeably that I was drowned, and that sea anemones were feeling over my face with their soft palps. </span>
      <span id="f0893">I woke with a start, and with an odd fancy that some greyish animal had just rushed out of the chamber. </span>
      <span id="f0894">I tried to get to sleep again, but I felt restless and uncomfortable. </span>
      <span id="f0895">It was that dim grey hour when things are just creeping out of darkness, when everything is colourless and clear cut, and yet unreal. </span>
      <span id="f0896">I got up, and went down into the great hall, and so out upon the flagstones in front of the palace. </span>
      <span id="f0897">I thought I would make a virtue of necessity, and see the sunrise.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0898">&#39;The moon was setting, and the dying moonlight and the first pallor of dawn were mingled in a ghastly half-light. </span>
      <span id="f0899">The bushes were inky black, the ground a sombre grey, the sky colourless and cheerless. </span>
      <span id="f0900">And up the hill I thought I could see ghosts. </span>
      <span id="f0901">There several times, as I scanned the slope, I saw white figures. </span>
      <span id="f0902">Twice I fancied I saw a solitary white, ape-like creature running rather quickly up the hill, and once near the ruins I saw a leash of them carrying some dark body. </span>
      <span id="f0903">They moved hastily. </span>
      <span id="f0904">I did not see what became of them. </span>
      <span id="f0905">It seemed that they vanished among the bushes. </span>
      <span id="f0906">The dawn was still indistinct, you must understand. </span>
      <span id="f0907">I was feeling that chill, uncertain, early-morning feeling you may have known. </span>
      <span id="f0908">I doubted my eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0909">&#39;As the eastern sky grew brighter, and the light of the day came on and its vivid colouring returned upon the world once more, I scanned the view keenly. </span>
      <span id="f0910">But I saw no vestige of my white figures. </span>
      <span id="f0911">They were mere creatures of the half light. </span>
      <span id="f0912">&#34;They must have been ghosts,&#34; I said; &#34;I wonder whence they dated.&#34; For a queer notion of Grant Allen&#39;s came into my head, and amused me. </span>
      <span id="f0913">If each generation die and leave ghosts, he argued, the world at last will get overcrowded with them. </span>
      <span id="f0914">On that theory they would have grown innumerable some Eight Hundred Thousand Years hence, and it was no great wonder to see four at once. </span>
      <span id="f0915">But the jest was unsatisfying, and I was thinking of these figures all the morning, until Weena&#39;s rescue drove them out of my head. </span>
      <span id="f0916">I associated them in some indefinite way with the white animal I had startled in my first passionate search for the Time Machine. </span>
      <span id="f0917">But Weena was a pleasant substitute. </span>
      <span id="f0918">Yet all the same, they were soon destined to take far deadlier possession of my mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0919">&#39;I think I have said how much hotter than our own was the weather of this Golden Age. </span>
      <span id="f0920">I cannot account for it. </span>
      <span id="f0921">It may be that the sun was hotter, or the earth nearer the sun. </span>
      <span id="f0922">It is usual to assume that the sun will go on cooling steadily in the future. </span>
      <span id="f0923">But people, unfamiliar with such speculations as those of the younger Darwin, forget that the planets must ultimately fall back one by one into the parent body. </span>
      <span id="f0924">As these catastrophes occur, the sun will blaze with renewed energy; and it may be that some inner planet had suffered this fate. </span>
      <span id="f0925">Whatever the reason, the fact remains that the sun was very much hotter than we know it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0926">&#39;Well, one very hot morning—my fourth, I think—as I was seeking shelter from the heat and glare in a colossal ruin near the great house where I slept and fed, there happened this strange thing: Clambering among these heaps of masonry, I found a narrow gallery, whose end and side windows were blocked by fallen masses of stone. </span>
      <span id="f0927">By contrast with the brilliancy outside, it seemed at first impenetrably dark to me. </span>
      <span id="f0928">I entered it groping, for the change from light to blackness made spots of colour swim before me. </span>
      <span id="f0929">Suddenly I halted spellbound. </span>
      <span id="f0930">A pair of eyes, luminous by reflection against the daylight without, was watching me out of the darkness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0931">&#39;The old instinctive dread of wild beasts came upon me. </span>
      <span id="f0932">I clenched my hands and steadfastly looked into the glaring eyeballs. </span>
      <span id="f0933">I was afraid to turn. </span>
      <span id="f0934">Then the thought of the absolute security in which humanity appeared to be living came to my mind. </span>
      <span id="f0935">And then I remembered that strange terror of the dark. </span>
      <span id="f0936">Overcoming my fear to some extent, I advanced a step and spoke. </span>
      <span id="f0937">I will admit that my voice was harsh and ill-controlled. </span>
      <span id="f0938">I put out my hand and touched something soft. </span>
      <span id="f0939">At once the eyes darted sideways, and something white ran past me. </span>
      <span id="f0940">I turned with my heart in my mouth, and saw a queer little ape-like figure, its head held down in a peculiar manner, running across the sunlit space behind me. </span>
      <span id="f0941">It blundered against a block of granite, staggered aside, and in a moment was hidden in a black shadow beneath another pile of ruined masonry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0942">&#39;My impression of it is, of course, imperfect; but I know it was a dull white, and had strange large greyish-red eyes; also that there was flaxen hair on its head and down its back. </span>
      <span id="f0943">But, as I say, it went too fast for me to see distinctly. </span>
      <span id="f0944">I cannot even say whether it ran on all-fours, or only with its forearms held very low. </span>
      <span id="f0945">After an instant&#39;s pause I followed it into the second heap of ruins. </span>
      <span id="f0946">I could not find it at first; but, after a time in the profound obscurity, I came upon one of those round well-like openings of which I have told you, half closed by a fallen pillar. </span>
      <span id="f0947">A sudden thought came to me. </span>
      <span id="f0948">Could this Thing have vanished down the shaft? </span>
      <span id="f0949">I lit a match, and, looking down, I saw a small, white, moving creature, with large bright eyes which regarded me steadfastly as it retreated. </span>
      <span id="f0950">It made me shudder. </span>
      <span id="f0951">It was so like a human spider! </span>
      <span id="f0952">It was clambering down the wall, and now I saw for the first time a number of metal foot and hand rests forming a kind of ladder down the shaft. </span>
      <span id="f0953">Then the light burned my fingers and fell out of my hand, going out as it dropped, and when I had lit another the little monster had disappeared.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0954">&#39;I do not know how long I sat peering down that well. </span>
      <span id="f0955">It was not for some time that I could succeed in persuading myself that the thing I had seen was human. </span>
      <span id="f0956">But, gradually, the truth dawned on me: that Man had not remained one species, but had differentiated into two distinct animals: that my graceful children of the Upper-world were not the sole descendants of our generation, but that this bleached, obscene, nocturnal Thing, which had flashed before me, was also heir to all the ages.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0957">&#39;I thought of the flickering pillars and of my theory of an underground ventilation. </span>
      <span id="f0958">I began to suspect their true import. </span>
      <span id="f0959">And what, I wondered, was this Lemur doing in my scheme of a perfectly balanced organization? </span>
      <span id="f0960">How was it related to the indolent serenity of the beautiful Upper-worlders? </span>
      <span id="f0961">And what was hidden down there, at the foot of that shaft? </span>
      <span id="f0962">I sat upon the edge of the well telling myself that, at any rate, there was nothing to fear, and that there I must descend for the solution of my difficulties. </span>
      <span id="f0963">And withal I was absolutely afraid to go! </span>
      <span id="f0964">As I hesitated, two of the beautiful Upper-world people came running in their amorous sport across the daylight in the shadow. </span>
      <span id="f0965">The male pursued the female, flinging flowers at her as he ran.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0966">&#39;They seemed distressed to find me, my arm against the overturned pillar, peering down the well. </span>
      <span id="f0967">Apparently it was considered bad form to remark these apertures; for when I pointed to this one, and tried to frame a question about it in their tongue, they were still more visibly distressed and turned away. </span>
      <span id="f0968">But they were interested by my matches, and I struck some to amuse them. </span>
      <span id="f0969">I tried them again about the well, and again I failed. </span>
      <span id="f0970">So presently I left them, meaning to go back to Weena, and see what I could get from her. </span>
      <span id="f0971">But my mind was already in revolution; my guesses and impressions were slipping and sliding to a new adjustment. </span>
      <span id="f0972">I had now a clue to the import of these wells, to the ventilating towers, to the mystery of the ghosts; to say nothing of a hint at the meaning of the bronze gates and the fate of the Time Machine! </span>
      <span id="f0973">And very vaguely there came a suggestion towards the solution of the economic problem that had puzzled me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0974">&#39;Here was the new view. </span>
      <span id="f0975">Plainly, this second species of Man was subterranean. </span>
      <span id="f0976">There were three circumstances in particular which made me think that its rare emergence above ground was the outcome of a long-continued underground habit. </span>
      <span id="f0977">In the first place, there was the bleached look common in most animals that live largely in the dark—the white fish of the Kentucky caves, for instance. </span>
      <span id="f0978">Then, those large eyes, with that capacity for reflecting light, are common features of nocturnal things—witness the owl and the cat. </span>
      <span id="f0979">And last of all, that evident confusion in the sunshine, that hasty yet fumbling awkward flight towards dark shadow, and that peculiar carriage of the head while in the light—all reinforced the theory of an extreme sensitiveness of the retina.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0980">&#39;Beneath my feet, then, the earth must be tunnelled enormously, and these tunnellings were the habitat of the new race. </span>
      <span id="f0981">The presence of ventilating shafts and wells along the hill slopes—everywhere, in fact, except along the river valley—showed how universal were its ramifications. </span>
      <span id="f0982">What so natural, then, as to assume that it was in this artificial Underworld that such work as was necessary to the comfort of the daylight race was done? </span>
      <span id="f0983">The notion was so plausible that I at once accepted it, and went on to assume the how of this splitting of the human species. </span>
      <span id="f0984">I dare say you will anticipate the shape of my theory; though, for myself, I very soon felt that it fell far short of the truth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0985">&#39;At first, proceeding from the problems of our own age, it seemed clear as daylight to me that the gradual widening of the present merely temporary and social difference between the Capitalist and the Labourer, was the key to the whole position. </span>
      <span id="f0986">No doubt it will seem grotesque enough to you—and wildly incredible!—and yet even now there are existing circumstances to point that way. </span>
      <span id="f0987">There is a tendency to utilize underground space for the less ornamental purposes of civilization; there is the Metropolitan Railway in London, for instance, there are new electric railways, there are subways, there are underground workrooms and restaurants, and they increase and multiply. </span>
      <span id="f0988">Evidently, I thought, this tendency had increased till Industry had gradually lost its birthright in the sky. </span>
      <span id="f0989">I mean that it had gone deeper and deeper into larger and ever larger underground factories, spending a still-increasing amount of its time therein, till, in the end—! </span>
      <span id="f0990">Even now, does not an East-end worker live in such artificial conditions as practically to be cut off from the natural surface of the earth?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0991">&#39;Again, the exclusive tendency of richer people—due, no doubt, to the increasing refinement of their education, and the widening gulf between them and the rude violence of the poor—is already leading to the closing, in their interest, of considerable portions of the surface of the land. </span>
      <span id="f0992">About London, for instance, perhaps half the prettier country is shut in against intrusion. </span>
      <span id="f0993">And this same widening gulf—which is due to the length and expense of the higher educational process and the increased facilities for and temptations towards refined habits on the part of the rich—will make that exchange between class and class, that promotion by intermarriage which at present retards the splitting of our species along lines of social stratification, less and less frequent. </span>
      <span id="f0994">So, in the end, above ground you must have the Haves, pursuing pleasure and comfort and beauty, and below ground the Have-nots, the Workers getting continually adapted to the conditions of their labour. </span>
      <span id="f0995">Once they were there, they would no doubt have to pay rent, and not a little of it, for the ventilation of their caverns; and if they refused, they would starve or be suffocated for arrears. </span>
      <span id="f0996">Such of them as were so constituted as to be miserable and rebellious would die; and, in the end, the balance being permanent, the survivors would become as well adapted to the conditions of underground life, and as happy in their way, as the Upper-world people were to theirs. </span>
      <span id="f0997">As it seemed to me, the refined beauty and the etiolated pallor followed naturally enough.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0998">&#39;The great triumph of Humanity I had dreamed of took a different shape in my mind. </span>
      <span id="f0999">It had been no such triumph of moral education and general co-operation as I had imagined. </span>
      <span id="f1000">Instead, I saw a real aristocracy, armed with a perfected science and working to a logical conclusion the industrial system of to-day. </span>
      <span id="f1001">Its triumph had not been simply a triumph over Nature, but a triumph over Nature and the fellow-man. </span>
      <span id="f1002">This, I must warn you, was my theory at the time. </span>
      <span id="f1003">I had no convenient cicerone in the pattern of the Utopian books. </span>
      <span id="f1004">My explanation may be absolutely wrong. </span>
      <span id="f1005">I still think it is the most plausible one. </span>
      <span id="f1006">But even on this supposition the balanced civilization that was at last attained must have long since passed its zenith, and was now far fallen into decay. </span>
      <span id="f1007">The too-perfect security of the Upper-worlders had led them to a slow movement of degeneration, to a general dwindling in size, strength, and intelligence. </span>
      <span id="f1008">That I could see clearly enough already. </span>
      <span id="f1009">What had happened to the Under-grounders I did not yet suspect; but from what I had seen of the Morlocks—that, by the by, was the name by which these creatures were called—I could imagine that the modification of the human type was even far more profound than among the &#34;Eloi,&#34; the beautiful race that I already knew.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1010">&#39;Then came troublesome doubts. </span>
      <span id="f1011">Why had the Morlocks taken my Time Machine? </span>
      <span id="f1012">For I felt sure it was they who had taken it. </span>
      <span id="f1013">Why, too, if the Eloi were masters, could they not restore the machine to me? </span>
      <span id="f1014">And why were they so terribly afraid of the dark? </span>
      <span id="f1015">I proceeded, as I have said, to question Weena about this Under-world, but here again I was disappointed. </span>
      <span id="f1016">At first she would not understand my questions, and presently she refused to answer them. </span>
      <span id="f1017">She shivered as though the topic was unendurable. </span>
      <span id="f1018">And when I pressed her, perhaps a little harshly, she burst into tears. </span>
      <span id="f1019">They were the only tears, except my own, I ever saw in that Golden Age. </span>
      <span id="f1020">When I saw them I ceased abruptly to trouble about the Morlocks, and was only concerned in banishing these signs of the human inheritance from Weena&#39;s eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1021">And very soon she was smiling and clapping her hands, while I solemnly burned a match.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>