<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER VI</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1022">CHAPTER VI</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1023">&#39;It may seem odd to you, but it was two days before I could follow up the new-found clue in what was manifestly the proper way. </span>
      <span id="f1024">I felt a peculiar shrinking from those pallid bodies. </span>
      <span id="f1025">They were just the half-bleached colour of the worms and things one sees preserved in spirit in a zoological museum. </span>
      <span id="f1026">And they were filthily cold to the touch. </span>
      <span id="f1027">Probably my shrinking was largely due to the sympathetic influence of the Eloi, whose disgust of the Morlocks I now began to appreciate.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1028">&#39;The next night I did not sleep well. </span>
      <span id="f1029">Probably my health was a little disordered. </span>
      <span id="f1030">I was oppressed with perplexity and doubt. </span>
      <span id="f1031">Once or twice I had a feeling of intense fear for which I could perceive no definite reason. </span>
      <span id="f1032">I remember creeping noiselessly into the great hall where the little people were sleeping in the moonlight—that night Weena was among them—and feeling reassured by their presence. </span>
      <span id="f1033">It occurred to me even then, that in the course of a few days the moon must pass through its last quarter, and the nights grow dark, when the appearances of these unpleasant creatures from below, these whitened Lemurs, this new vermin that had replaced the old, might be more abundant. </span>
      <span id="f1034">And on both these days I had the restless feeling of one who shirks an inevitable duty. </span>
      <span id="f1035">I felt assured that the Time Machine was only to be recovered by boldly penetrating these underground mysteries. </span>
      <span id="f1036">Yet I could not face the mystery. </span>
      <span id="f1037">If only I had had a companion it would have been different. </span>
      <span id="f1038">But I was so horribly alone, and even to clamber down into the darkness of the well appalled me. </span>
      <span id="f1039">I don&#39;t know if you will understand my feeling, but I never felt quite safe at my back.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1040">&#39;It was this restlessness, this insecurity, perhaps, that drove me further and further afield in my exploring expeditions. </span>
      <span id="f1041">Going to the south-westward towards the rising country that is now called Combe Wood, I observed far off, in the direction of nineteenth-century Banstead, a vast green structure, different in character from any I had hitherto seen. </span>
      <span id="f1042">It was larger than the largest of the palaces or ruins I knew, and the facade had an Oriental look: the face of it having the lustre, as well as the pale-green tint, a kind of bluish-green, of a certain type of Chinese porcelain. </span>
      <span id="f1043">This difference in aspect suggested a difference in use, and I was minded to push on and explore. </span>
      <span id="f1044">But the day was growing late, and I had come upon the sight of the place after a long and tiring circuit; so I resolved to hold over the adventure for the following day, and I returned to the welcome and the caresses of little Weena. </span>
      <span id="f1045">But next morning I perceived clearly enough that my curiosity regarding the Palace of Green Porcelain was a piece of self-deception, to enable me to shirk, by another day, an experience I dreaded. </span>
      <span id="f1046">I resolved I would make the descent without further waste of time, and started out in the early morning towards a well near the ruins of granite and aluminium.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1047">&#39;Little Weena ran with me. </span>
      <span id="f1048">She danced beside me to the well, but when she saw me lean over the mouth and look downward, she seemed strangely disconcerted. </span>
      <span id="f1049">&#34;Good-bye, little Weena,&#34; I said, kissing her; and then putting her down, I began to feel over the parapet for the climbing hooks. </span>
      <span id="f1050">Rather hastily, I may as well confess, for I feared my courage might leak away! </span>
      <span id="f1051">At first she watched me in amazement. </span>
      <span id="f1052">Then she gave a most piteous cry, and running to me, she began to pull at me with her little hands. </span>
      <span id="f1053">I think her opposition nerved me rather to proceed. </span>
      <span id="f1054">I shook her off, perhaps a little roughly, and in another moment I was in the throat of the well. </span>
      <span id="f1055">I saw her agonized face over the parapet, and smiled to reassure her. </span>
      <span id="f1056">Then I had to look down at the unstable hooks to which I clung.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1057">&#39;I had to clamber down a shaft of perhaps two hundred yards. </span>
      <span id="f1058">The descent was effected by means of metallic bars projecting from the sides of the well, and these being adapted to the needs of a creature much smaller and lighter than myself, I was speedily cramped and fatigued by the descent. </span>
      <span id="f1059">And not simply fatigued! </span>
      <span id="f1060">One of the bars bent suddenly under my weight, and almost swung me off into the blackness beneath. </span>
      <span id="f1061">For a moment I hung by one hand, and after that experience I did not dare to rest again. </span>
      <span id="f1062">Though my arms and back were presently acutely painful, I went on clambering down the sheer descent with as quick a motion as possible. </span>
      <span id="f1063">Glancing upward, I saw the aperture, a small blue disk, in which a star was visible, while little Weena&#39;s head showed as a round black projection. </span>
      <span id="f1064">The thudding sound of a machine below grew louder and more oppressive. </span>
      <span id="f1065">Everything save that little disk above was profoundly dark, and when I looked up again Weena had disappeared.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1066">&#39;I was in an agony of discomfort. </span>
      <span id="f1067">I had some thought of trying to go up the shaft again, and leave the Under-world alone. </span>
      <span id="f1068">But even while I turned this over in my mind I continued to descend. </span>
      <span id="f1069">At last, with intense relief, I saw dimly coming up, a foot to the right of me, a slender loophole in the wall. </span>
      <span id="f1070">Swinging myself in, I found it was the aperture of a narrow horizontal tunnel in which I could lie down and rest. </span>
      <span id="f1071">It was not too soon. </span>
      <span id="f1072">My arms ached, my back was cramped, and I was trembling with the prolonged terror of a fall. </span>
      <span id="f1073">Besides this, the unbroken darkness had had a distressing effect upon my eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1074">The air was full of the throb and hum of machinery pumping air down the shaft.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1075">&#39;I do not know how long I lay. </span>
      <span id="f1076">I was roused by a soft hand touching my face. </span>
      <span id="f1077">Starting up in the darkness I snatched at my matches and, hastily striking one, I saw three stooping white creatures similar to the one I had seen above ground in the ruin, hastily retreating before the light. </span>
      <span id="f1078">Living, as they did, in what appeared to me impenetrable darkness, their eyes were abnormally large and sensitive, just as are the pupils of the abysmal fishes, and they reflected the light in the same way. </span>
      <span id="f1079">I have no doubt they could see me in that rayless obscurity, and they did not seem to have any fear of me apart from the light. </span>
      <span id="f1080">But, so soon as I struck a match in order to see them, they fled incontinently, vanishing into dark gutters and tunnels, from which their eyes glared at me in the strangest fashion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1081">&#39;I tried to call to them, but the language they had was apparently different from that of the Over-world people; so that I was needs left to my own unaided efforts, and the thought of flight before exploration was even then in my mind. </span>
      <span id="f1082">But I said to myself, &#34;You are in for it now,&#34; and, feeling my way along the tunnel, I found the noise of machinery grow louder. </span>
      <span id="f1083">Presently the walls fell away from me, and I came to a large open space, and striking another match, saw that I had entered a vast arched cavern, which stretched into utter darkness beyond the range of my light. </span>
      <span id="f1084">The view I had of it was as much as one could see in the burning of a match.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1085">&#39;Necessarily my memory is vague. </span>
      <span id="f1086">Great shapes like big machines rose out of the dimness, and cast grotesque black shadows, in which dim spectral Morlocks sheltered from the glare. </span>
      <span id="f1087">The place, by the by, was very stuffy and oppressive, and the faint halitus of freshly shed blood was in the air. </span>
      <span id="f1088">Some way down the central vista was a little table of white metal, laid with what seemed a meal. </span>
      <span id="f1089">The Morlocks at any rate were carnivorous! </span>
      <span id="f1090">Even at the time, I remember wondering what large animal could have survived to furnish the red joint I saw. </span>
      <span id="f1091">It was all very indistinct: the heavy smell, the big unmeaning shapes, the obscene figures lurking in the shadows, and only waiting for the darkness to come at me again! </span>
      <span id="f1092">Then the match burned down, and stung my fingers, and fell, a wriggling red spot in the blackness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1093">&#39;I have thought since how particularly ill-equipped I was for such an experience. </span>
      <span id="f1094">When I had started with the Time Machine, I had started with the absurd assumption that the men of the Future would certainly be infinitely ahead of ourselves in all their appliances. </span>
      <span id="f1095">I had come without arms, without medicine, without anything to smoke—at times I missed tobacco frightfully—even without enough matches. </span>
      <span id="f1096">If only I had thought of a Kodak! </span>
      <span id="f1097">I could have flashed that glimpse of the Underworld in a second, and examined it at leisure. </span>
      <span id="f1098">But, as it was, I stood there with only the weapons and the powers that Nature had endowed me with—hands, feet, and teeth; these, and four safety-matches that still remained to me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1099">&#39;I was afraid to push my way in among all this machinery in the dark, and it was only with my last glimpse of light I discovered that my store of matches had run low. </span>
      <span id="f1100">It had never occurred to me until that moment that there was any need to economize them, and I had wasted almost half the box in astonishing the Upper-worlders, to whom fire was a novelty. </span>
      <span id="f1101">Now, as I say, I had four left, and while I stood in the dark, a hand touched mine, lank fingers came feeling over my face, and I was sensible of a peculiar unpleasant odour. </span>
      <span id="f1102">I fancied I heard the breathing of a crowd of those dreadful little beings about me. </span>
      <span id="f1103">I felt the box of matches in my hand being gently disengaged, and other hands behind me plucking at my clothing. </span>
      <span id="f1104">The sense of these unseen creatures examining me was indescribably unpleasant. </span>
      <span id="f1105">The sudden realization of my ignorance of their ways of thinking and doing came home to me very vividly in the darkness. </span>
      <span id="f1106">I shouted at them as loudly as I could. </span>
      <span id="f1107">They started away, and then I could feel them approaching me again. </span>
      <span id="f1108">They clutched at me more boldly, whispering odd sounds to each other. </span>
      <span id="f1109">I shivered violently, and shouted again—rather discordantly. </span>
      <span id="f1110">This time they were not so seriously alarmed, and they made a queer laughing noise as they came back at me. </span>
      <span id="f1111">I will confess I was horribly frightened. </span>
      <span id="f1112">I determined to strike another match and escape under the protection of its glare. </span>
      <span id="f1113">I did so, and eking out the flicker with a scrap of paper from my pocket, I made good my retreat to the narrow tunnel. </span>
      <span id="f1114">But I had scarce entered this when my light was blown out and in the blackness I could hear the Morlocks rustling like wind among leaves, and pattering like the rain, as they hurried after me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1115">&#39;In a moment I was clutched by several hands, and there was no mistaking that they were trying to haul me back. </span>
      <span id="f1116">I struck another light, and waved it in their dazzled faces. </span>
      <span id="f1117">You can scarce imagine how nauseatingly inhuman they looked—those pale, chinless faces and great, lidless, pinkish-grey eyes!—as they stared in their blindness and bewilderment. </span>
      <span id="f1118">But I did not stay to look, I promise you: I retreated again, and when my second match had ended, I struck my third. </span>
      <span id="f1119">It had almost burned through when I reached the opening into the shaft. </span>
      <span id="f1120">I lay down on the edge, for the throb of the great pump below made me giddy. </span>
      <span id="f1121">Then I felt sideways for the projecting hooks, and, as I did so, my feet were grasped from behind, and I was violently tugged backward. </span>
      <span id="f1122">I lit my last match ... </span>
      <span id="f1123">and it incontinently went out. </span>
      <span id="f1124">But I had my hand on the climbing bars now, and, kicking violently, I disengaged myself from the clutches of the Morlocks and was speedily clambering up the shaft, while they stayed peering and blinking up at me: all but one little wretch who followed me for some way, and well-nigh secured my boot as a trophy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1125">&#39;That climb seemed interminable to me. </span>
      <span id="f1126">With the last twenty or thirty feet of it a deadly nausea came upon me. </span>
      <span id="f1127">I had the greatest difficulty in keeping my hold. </span>
      <span id="f1128">The last few yards was a frightful struggle against this faintness. </span>
      <span id="f1129">Several times my head swam, and I felt all the sensations of falling. </span>
      <span id="f1130">At last, however, I got over the well-mouth somehow, and staggered out of the ruin into the blinding sunlight. </span>
      <span id="f1131">I fell upon my face. </span>
      <span id="f1132">Even the soil smelt sweet and clean. </span>
      <span id="f1133">Then I remember Weena kissing my hands and ears, and the voices of others among the Eloi. </span>
      <span id="f1134">Then, for a time, I was insensible.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>