<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER VII</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1135">CHAPTER VII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1136">&#39;Now, indeed, I seemed in a worse case than before. </span>
      <span id="f1137">Hitherto, except during my night&#39;s anguish at the loss of the Time Machine, I had felt a sustaining hope of ultimate escape, but that hope was staggered by these new discoveries. </span>
      <span id="f1138">Hitherto I had merely thought myself impeded by the childish simplicity of the little people, and by some unknown forces which I had only to understand to overcome; but there was an altogether new element in the sickening quality of the Morlocks—a something inhuman and malign. </span>
      <span id="f1139">Instinctively I loathed them. </span>
      <span id="f1140">Before, I had felt as a man might feel who had fallen into a pit: my concern was with the pit and how to get out of it. </span>
      <span id="f1141">Now I felt like a beast in a trap, whose enemy would come upon him soon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1142">&#39;The enemy I dreaded may surprise you. </span>
      <span id="f1143">It was the darkness of the new moon. </span>
      <span id="f1144">Weena had put this into my head by some at first incomprehensible remarks about the Dark Nights. </span>
      <span id="f1145">It was not now such a very difficult problem to guess what the coming Dark Nights might mean. </span>
      <span id="f1146">The moon was on the wane: each night there was a longer interval of darkness. </span>
      <span id="f1147">And I now understood to some slight degree at least the reason of the fear of the little Upper-world people for the dark. </span>
      <span id="f1148">I wondered vaguely what foul villainy it might be that the Morlocks did under the new moon. </span>
      <span id="f1149">I felt pretty sure now that my second hypothesis was all wrong. </span>
      <span id="f1150">The Upper-world people might once have been the favoured aristocracy, and the Morlocks their mechanical servants: but that had long since passed away. </span>
      <span id="f1151">The two species that had resulted from the evolution of man were sliding down towards, or had already arrived at, an altogether new relationship. </span>
      <span id="f1152">The Eloi, like the Carolingian kings, had decayed to a mere beautiful futility. </span>
      <span id="f1153">They still possessed the earth on sufferance: since the Morlocks, subterranean for innumerable generations, had come at last to find the daylit surface intolerable. </span>
      <span id="f1154">And the Morlocks made their garments, I inferred, and maintained them in their habitual needs, perhaps through the survival of an old habit of service. </span>
      <span id="f1155">They did it as a standing horse paws with his foot, or as a man enjoys killing animals in sport: because ancient and departed necessities had impressed it on the organism. </span>
      <span id="f1156">But, clearly, the old order was already in part reversed. </span>
      <span id="f1157">The Nemesis of the delicate ones was creeping on apace. </span>
      <span id="f1158">Ages ago, thousands of generations ago, man had thrust his brother man out of the ease and the sunshine. </span>
      <span id="f1159">And now that brother was coming back changed! </span>
      <span id="f1160">Already the Eloi had begun to learn one old lesson anew. </span>
      <span id="f1161">They were becoming reacquainted with Fear. </span>
      <span id="f1162">And suddenly there came into my head the memory of the meat I had seen in the Under-world. </span>
      <span id="f1163">It seemed odd how it floated into my mind: not stirred up as it were by the current of my meditations, but coming in almost like a question from outside. </span>
      <span id="f1164">I tried to recall the form of it. </span>
      <span id="f1165">I had a vague sense of something familiar, but I could not tell what it was at the time.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1166">&#39;Still, however helpless the little people in the presence of their mysterious Fear, I was differently constituted. </span>
      <span id="f1167">I came out of this age of ours, this ripe prime of the human race, when Fear does not paralyse and mystery has lost its terrors. </span>
      <span id="f1168">I at least would defend myself. </span>
      <span id="f1169">Without further delay I determined to make myself arms and a fastness where I might sleep. </span>
      <span id="f1170">With that refuge as a base, I could face this strange world with some of that confidence I had lost in realizing to what creatures night by night I lay exposed. </span>
      <span id="f1171">I felt I could never sleep again until my bed was secure from them. </span>
      <span id="f1172">I shuddered with horror to think how they must already have examined me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1173">&#39;I wandered during the afternoon along the valley of the Thames, but found nothing that commended itself to my mind as inaccessible. </span>
      <span id="f1174">All the buildings and trees seemed easily practicable to such dexterous climbers as the Morlocks, to judge by their wells, must be. </span>
      <span id="f1175">Then the tall pinnacles of the Palace of Green Porcelain and the polished gleam of its walls came back to my memory; and in the evening, taking Weena like a child upon my shoulder, I went up the hills towards the south-west. </span>
      <span id="f1176">The distance, I had reckoned, was seven or eight miles, but it must have been nearer eighteen. </span>
      <span id="f1177">I had first seen the place on a moist afternoon when distances are deceptively diminished. </span>
      <span id="f1178">In addition, the heel of one of my shoes was loose, and a nail was working through the sole—they were comfortable old shoes I wore about indoors—so that I was lame. </span>
      <span id="f1179">And it was already long past sunset when I came in sight of the palace, silhouetted black against the pale yellow of the sky.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1180">&#39;Weena had been hugely delighted when I began to carry her, but after a while she desired me to let her down, and ran along by the side of me, occasionally darting off on either hand to pick flowers to stick in my pockets. </span>
      <span id="f1181">My pockets had always puzzled Weena, but at the last she had concluded that they were an eccentric kind of vase for floral decoration. </span>
      <span id="f1182">At least she utilized them for that purpose. </span>
      <span id="f1183">And that reminds me! </span>
      <span id="f1184">In changing my jacket I found...&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1185">The Time Traveller paused, put his hand into his pocket, and silently placed two withered flowers, not unlike very large white mallows, upon the little table. </span>
      <span id="f1186">Then he resumed his narrative.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1187">&#39;As the hush of evening crept over the world and we proceeded over the hill crest towards Wimbledon, Weena grew tired and wanted to return to the house of grey stone. </span>
      <span id="f1188">But I pointed out the distant pinnacles of the Palace of Green Porcelain to her, and contrived to make her understand that we were seeking a refuge there from her Fear. </span>
      <span id="f1189">You know that great pause that comes upon things before the dusk? </span>
      <span id="f1190">Even the breeze stops in the trees. </span>
      <span id="f1191">To me there is always an air of expectation about that evening stillness. </span>
      <span id="f1192">The sky was clear, remote, and empty save for a few horizontal bars far down in the sunset. </span>
      <span id="f1193">Well, that night the expectation took the colour of my fears. </span>
      <span id="f1194">In that darkling calm my senses seemed preternaturally sharpened. </span>
      <span id="f1195">I fancied I could even feel the hollowness of the ground beneath my feet: could, indeed, almost see through it the Morlocks on their ant-hill going hither and thither and waiting for the dark. </span>
      <span id="f1196">In my excitement I fancied that they would receive my invasion of their burrows as a declaration of war. </span>
      <span id="f1197">And why had they taken my Time Machine?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1198">&#39;So we went on in the quiet, and the twilight deepened into night. </span>
      <span id="f1199">The clear blue of the distance faded, and one star after another came out. </span>
      <span id="f1200">The ground grew dim and the trees black. </span>
      <span id="f1201">Weena&#39;s fears and her fatigue grew upon her. </span>
      <span id="f1202">I took her in my arms and talked to her and caressed her. </span>
      <span id="f1203">Then, as the darkness grew deeper, she put her arms round my neck, and, closing her eyes, tightly pressed her face against my shoulder. </span>
      <span id="f1204">So we went down a long slope into a valley, and there in the dimness I almost walked into a little river. </span>
      <span id="f1205">This I waded, and went up the opposite side of the valley, past a number of sleeping houses, and by a statue—a Faun, or some such figure, minus the head. </span>
      <span id="f1206">Here too were acacias. </span>
      <span id="f1207">So far I had seen nothing of the Morlocks, but it was yet early in the night, and the darker hours before the old moon rose were still to come.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1208">&#39;From the brow of the next hill I saw a thick wood spreading wide and black before me. </span>
      <span id="f1209">I hesitated at this. </span>
      <span id="f1210">I could see no end to it, either to the right or the left. </span>
      <span id="f1211">Feeling tired—my feet, in particular, were very sore—I carefully lowered Weena from my shoulder as I halted, and sat down upon the turf. </span>
      <span id="f1212">I could no longer see the Palace of Green Porcelain, and I was in doubt of my direction. </span>
      <span id="f1213">I looked into the thickness of the wood and thought of what it might hide. </span>
      <span id="f1214">Under that dense tangle of branches one would be out of sight of the stars. </span>
      <span id="f1215">Even were there no other lurking danger—a danger I did not care to let my imagination loose upon—there would still be all the roots to stumble over and the tree-boles to strike against.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1216">&#39;I was very tired, too, after the excitements of the day; so I decided that I would not face it, but would pass the night upon the open hill.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1217">&#39;Weena, I was glad to find, was fast asleep. </span>
      <span id="f1218">I carefully wrapped her in my jacket, and sat down beside her to wait for the moonrise. </span>
      <span id="f1219">The hill-side was quiet and deserted, but from the black of the wood there came now and then a stir of living things. </span>
      <span id="f1220">Above me shone the stars, for the night was very clear. </span>
      <span id="f1221">I felt a certain sense of friendly comfort in their twinkling. </span>
      <span id="f1222">All the old constellations had gone from the sky, however: that slow movement which is imperceptible in a hundred human lifetimes, had long since rearranged them in unfamiliar groupings. </span>
      <span id="f1223">But the Milky Way, it seemed to me, was still the same tattered streamer of star-dust as of yore. </span>
      <span id="f1224">Southward (as I judged it) was a very bright red star that was new to me; it was even more splendid than our own green Sirius. </span>
      <span id="f1225">And amid all these scintillating points of light one bright planet shone kindly and steadily like the face of an old friend.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1226">&#39;Looking at these stars suddenly dwarfed my own troubles and all the gravities of terrestrial life. </span>
      <span id="f1227">I thought of their unfathomable distance, and the slow inevitable drift of their movements out of the unknown past into the unknown future. </span>
      <span id="f1228">I thought of the great precessional cycle that the pole of the earth describes. </span>
      <span id="f1229">Only forty times had that silent revolution occurred during all the years that I had traversed. </span>
      <span id="f1230">And during these few revolutions all the activity, all the traditions, the complex organizations, the nations, languages, literatures, aspirations, even the mere memory of Man as I knew him, had been swept out of existence. </span>
      <span id="f1231">Instead were these frail creatures who had forgotten their high ancestry, and the white Things of which I went in terror. </span>
      <span id="f1232">Then I thought of the Great Fear that was between the two species, and for the first time, with a sudden shiver, came the clear knowledge of what the meat I had seen might be. </span>
      <span id="f1233">Yet it was too horrible! </span>
      <span id="f1234">I looked at little Weena sleeping beside me, her face white and starlike under the stars, and forthwith dismissed the thought.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1235">&#39;Through that long night I held my mind off the Morlocks as well as I could, and whiled away the time by trying to fancy I could find signs of the old constellations in the new confusion. </span>
      <span id="f1236">The sky kept very clear, except for a hazy cloud or so. </span>
      <span id="f1237">No doubt I dozed at times. </span>
      <span id="f1238">Then, as my vigil wore on, came a faintness in the eastward sky, like the reflection of some colourless fire, and the old moon rose, thin and peaked and white. </span>
      <span id="f1239">And close behind, and overtaking it, and overflowing it, the dawn came, pale at first, and then growing pink and warm. </span>
      <span id="f1240">No Morlocks had approached us. </span>
      <span id="f1241">Indeed, I had seen none upon the hill that night. </span>
      <span id="f1242">And in the confidence of renewed day it almost seemed to me that my fear had been unreasonable. </span>
      <span id="f1243">I stood up and found my foot with the loose heel swollen at the ankle and painful under the heel; so I sat down again, took off my shoes, and flung them away.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1244">&#39;I awakened Weena, and we went down into the wood, now green and pleasant instead of black and forbidding. </span>
      <span id="f1245">We found some fruit wherewith to break our fast. </span>
      <span id="f1246">We soon met others of the dainty ones, laughing and dancing in the sunlight as though there was no such thing in nature as the night. </span>
      <span id="f1247">And then I thought once more of the meat that I had seen. </span>
      <span id="f1248">I felt assured now of what it was, and from the bottom of my heart I pitied this last feeble rill from the great flood of humanity. </span>
      <span id="f1249">Clearly, at some time in the Long-Ago of human decay the Morlocks&#39; food had run short. </span>
      <span id="f1250">Possibly they had lived on rats and such-like vermin. </span>
      <span id="f1251">Even now man is far less discriminating and exclusive in his food than he was—far less than any monkey. </span>
      <span id="f1252">His prejudice against human flesh is no deep-seated instinct. </span>
      <span id="f1253">And so these inhuman sons of men——! </span>
      <span id="f1254">I tried to look at the thing in a scientific spirit. </span>
      <span id="f1255">After all, they were less human and more remote than our cannibal ancestors of three or four thousand years ago. </span>
      <span id="f1256">And the intelligence that would have made this state of things a torment had gone. </span>
      <span id="f1257">Why should I trouble myself? </span>
      <span id="f1258">These Eloi were mere fatted cattle, which the ant-like Morlocks preserved and preyed upon—probably saw to the breeding of. </span>
      <span id="f1259">And there was Weena dancing at my side!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1260">&#39;Then I tried to preserve myself from the horror that was coming upon me, by regarding it as a rigorous punishment of human selfishness. </span>
      <span id="f1261">Man had been content to live in ease and delight upon the labours of his fellow-man, had taken Necessity as his watchword and excuse, and in the fullness of time Necessity had come home to him. </span>
      <span id="f1262">I even tried a Carlyle-like scorn of this wretched aristocracy in decay. </span>
      <span id="f1263">But this attitude of mind was impossible. </span>
      <span id="f1264">However great their intellectual degradation, the Eloi had kept too much of the human form not to claim my sympathy, and to make me perforce a sharer in their degradation and their Fear.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1265">&#39;I had at that time very vague ideas as to the course I should pursue. </span>
      <span id="f1266">My first was to secure some safe place of refuge, and to make myself such arms of metal or stone as I could contrive. </span>
      <span id="f1267">That necessity was immediate. </span>
      <span id="f1268">In the next place, I hoped to procure some means of fire, so that I should have the weapon of a torch at hand, for nothing, I knew, would be more efficient against these Morlocks. </span>
      <span id="f1269">Then I wanted to arrange some contrivance to break open the doors of bronze under the White Sphinx. </span>
      <span id="f1270">I had in mind a battering ram. </span>
      <span id="f1271">I had a persuasion that if I could enter those doors and carry a blaze of light before me I should discover the Time Machine and escape. </span>
      <span id="f1272">I could not imagine the Morlocks were strong enough to move it far away. </span>
      <span id="f1273">Weena I had resolved to bring with me to our own time. </span>
      <span id="f1274">And turning such schemes over in my mind I pursued our way towards the building which my fancy had chosen as our dwelling.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>