<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1275">CHAPTER VIII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1276">&#39;I found the Palace of Green Porcelain, when we approached it about noon, deserted and falling into ruin. </span>
      <span id="f1277">Only ragged vestiges of glass remained in its windows, and great sheets of the green facing had fallen away from the corroded metallic framework. </span>
      <span id="f1278">It lay very high upon a turfy down, and looking north-eastward before I entered it, I was surprised to see a large estuary, or even creek, where I judged Wandsworth and Battersea must once have been. </span>
      <span id="f1279">I thought then—though I never followed up the thought—of what might have happened, or might be happening, to the living things in the sea.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1280">&#39;The material of the Palace proved on examination to be indeed porcelain, and along the face of it I saw an inscription in some unknown character. </span>
      <span id="f1281">I thought, rather foolishly, that Weena might help me to interpret this, but I only learned that the bare idea of writing had never entered her head. </span>
      <span id="f1282">She always seemed to me, I fancy, more human than she was, perhaps because her affection was so human.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1283">&#39;Within the big valves of the door—which were open and broken—we found, instead of the customary hall, a long gallery lit by many side windows. </span>
      <span id="f1284">At the first glance I was reminded of a museum. </span>
      <span id="f1285">The tiled floor was thick with dust, and a remarkable array of miscellaneous objects was shrouded in the same grey covering. </span>
      <span id="f1286">Then I perceived, standing strange and gaunt in the centre of the hall, what was clearly the lower part of a huge skeleton. </span>
      <span id="f1287">I recognized by the oblique feet that it was some extinct creature after the fashion of the Megatherium. </span>
      <span id="f1288">The skull and the upper bones lay beside it in the thick dust, and in one place, where rain-water had dropped through a leak in the roof, the thing itself had been worn away. </span>
      <span id="f1289">Further in the gallery was the huge skeleton barrel of a Brontosaurus. </span>
      <span id="f1290">My museum hypothesis was confirmed. </span>
      <span id="f1291">Going towards the side I found what appeared to be sloping shelves, and clearing away the thick dust, I found the old familiar glass cases of our own time. </span>
      <span id="f1292">But they must have been air-tight to judge from the fair preservation of some of their contents.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1293">&#39;Clearly we stood among the ruins of some latter-day South Kensington! </span>
      <span id="f1294">Here, apparently, was the Palaeontological Section, and a very splendid array of fossils it must have been, though the inevitable process of decay that had been staved off for a time, and had, through the extinction of bacteria and fungi, lost ninety-nine hundredths of its force, was nevertheless, with extreme sureness if with extreme slowness at work again upon all its treasures. </span>
      <span id="f1295">Here and there I found traces of the little people in the shape of rare fossils broken to pieces or threaded in strings upon reeds. </span>
      <span id="f1296">And the cases had in some instances been bodily removed—by the Morlocks as I judged. </span>
      <span id="f1297">The place was very silent. </span>
      <span id="f1298">The thick dust deadened our footsteps. </span>
      <span id="f1299">Weena, who had been rolling a sea urchin down the sloping glass of a case, presently came, as I stared about me, and very quietly took my hand and stood beside me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1300">&#39;And at first I was so much surprised by this ancient monument of an intellectual age, that I gave no thought to the possibilities it presented. </span>
      <span id="f1301">Even my preoccupation about the Time Machine receded a little from my mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1302">&#39;To judge from the size of the place, this Palace of Green Porcelain had a great deal more in it than a Gallery of Palaeontology; possibly historical galleries; it might be, even a library! </span>
      <span id="f1303">To me, at least in my present circumstances, these would be vastly more interesting than this spectacle of oldtime geology in decay. </span>
      <span id="f1304">Exploring, I found another short gallery running transversely to the first. </span>
      <span id="f1305">This appeared to be devoted to minerals, and the sight of a block of sulphur set my mind running on gunpowder. </span>
      <span id="f1306">But I could find no saltpeter; indeed, no nitrates of any kind. </span>
      <span id="f1307">Doubtless they had deliquesced ages ago. </span>
      <span id="f1308">Yet the sulphur hung in my mind, and set up a train of thinking. </span>
      <span id="f1309">As for the rest of the contents of that gallery, though on the whole they were the best preserved of all I saw, I had little interest. </span>
      <span id="f1310">I am no specialist in mineralogy, and I went on down a very ruinous aisle running parallel to the first hall I had entered. </span>
      <span id="f1311">Apparently this section had been devoted to natural history, but everything had long since passed out of recognition. </span>
      <span id="f1312">A few shrivelled and blackened vestiges of what had once been stuffed animals, desiccated mummies in jars that had once held spirit, a brown dust of departed plants: that was all! </span>
      <span id="f1313">I was sorry for that, because I should have been glad to trace the patent readjustments by which the conquest of animated nature had been attained. </span>
      <span id="f1314">Then we came to a gallery of simply colossal proportions, but singularly ill-lit, the floor of it running downward at a slight angle from the end at which I entered. </span>
      <span id="f1315">At intervals white globes hung from the ceiling—many of them cracked and smashed—which suggested that originally the place had been artificially lit. </span>
      <span id="f1316">Here I was more in my element, for rising on either side of me were the huge bulks of big machines, all greatly corroded and many broken down, but some still fairly complete. </span>
      <span id="f1317">You know I have a certain weakness for mechanism, and I was inclined to linger among these; the more so as for the most part they had the interest of puzzles, and I could make only the vaguest guesses at what they were for. </span>
      <span id="f1318">I fancied that if I could solve their puzzles I should find myself in possession of powers that might be of use against the Morlocks.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1319">&#39;Suddenly Weena came very close to my side. </span>
      <span id="f1320">So suddenly that she startled me. </span>
      <span id="f1321">Had it not been for her I do not think I should have noticed that the floor of the gallery sloped at all. </span>
      <span id="f1322">[Footnote: It may be, of course, that the floor did not slope, but that the museum was built into the side of a hill.—ED.] The end I had come in at was quite above ground, and was lit by rare slit-like windows. </span>
      <span id="f1323">As you went down the length, the ground came up against these windows, until at last there was a pit like the &#34;area&#34; of a London house before each, and only a narrow line of daylight at the top. </span>
      <span id="f1324">I went slowly along, puzzling about the machines, and had been too intent upon them to notice the gradual diminution of the light, until Weena&#39;s increasing apprehensions drew my attention. </span>
      <span id="f1325">Then I saw that the gallery ran down at last into a thick darkness. </span>
      <span id="f1326">I hesitated, and then, as I looked round me, I saw that the dust was less abundant and its surface less even. </span>
      <span id="f1327">Further away towards the dimness, it appeared to be broken by a number of small narrow footprints. </span>
      <span id="f1328">My sense of the immediate presence of the Morlocks revived at that. </span>
      <span id="f1329">I felt that I was wasting my time in the academic examination of machinery. </span>
      <span id="f1330">I called to mind that it was already far advanced in the afternoon, and that I had still no weapon, no refuge, and no means of making a fire. </span>
      <span id="f1331">And then down in the remote blackness of the gallery I heard a peculiar pattering, and the same odd noises I had heard down the well.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1332">&#39;I took Weena&#39;s hand. </span>
      <span id="f1333">Then, struck with a sudden idea, I left her and turned to a machine from which projected a lever not unlike those in a signal-box. </span>
      <span id="f1334">Clambering upon the stand, and grasping this lever in my hands, I put all my weight upon it sideways. </span>
      <span id="f1335">Suddenly Weena, deserted in the central aisle, began to whimper. </span>
      <span id="f1336">I had judged the strength of the lever pretty correctly, for it snapped after a minute&#39;s strain, and I rejoined her with a mace in my hand more than sufficient, I judged, for any Morlock skull I might encounter. </span>
      <span id="f1337">And I longed very much to kill a Morlock or so. </span>
      <span id="f1338">Very inhuman, you may think, to want to go killing one&#39;s own descendants! </span>
      <span id="f1339">But it was impossible, somehow, to feel any humanity in the things. </span>
      <span id="f1340">Only my disinclination to leave Weena, and a persuasion that if I began to slake my thirst for murder my Time Machine might suffer, restrained me from going straight down the gallery and killing the brutes I heard.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1341">&#39;Well, mace in one hand and Weena in the other, I went out of that gallery and into another and still larger one, which at the first glance reminded me of a military chapel hung with tattered flags. </span>
      <span id="f1342">The brown and charred rags that hung from the sides of it, I presently recognized as the decaying vestiges of books. </span>
      <span id="f1343">They had long since dropped to pieces, and every semblance of print had left them. </span>
      <span id="f1344">But here and there were warped boards and cracked metallic clasps that told the tale well enough. </span>
      <span id="f1345">Had I been a literary man I might, perhaps, have moralized upon the futility of all ambition. </span>
      <span id="f1346">But as it was, the thing that struck me with keenest force was the enormous waste of labour to which this sombre wilderness of rotting paper testified. </span>
      <span id="f1347">At the time I will confess that I thought chiefly of the Philosophical Transactions and my own seventeen papers upon physical optics.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1348">&#39;Then, going up a broad staircase, we came to what may once have been a gallery of technical chemistry. </span>
      <span id="f1349">And here I had not a little hope of useful discoveries. </span>
      <span id="f1350">Except at one end where the roof had collapsed, this gallery was well preserved. </span>
      <span id="f1351">I went eagerly to every unbroken case. </span>
      <span id="f1352">And at last, in one of the really air-tight cases, I found a box of matches. </span>
      <span id="f1353">Very eagerly I tried them. </span>
      <span id="f1354">They were perfectly good. </span>
      <span id="f1355">They were not even damp. </span>
      <span id="f1356">I turned to Weena. </span>
      <span id="f1357">&#34;Dance,&#34; I cried to her in her own tongue. </span>
      <span id="f1358">For now I had a weapon indeed against the horrible creatures we feared. </span>
      <span id="f1359">And so, in that derelict museum, upon the thick soft carpeting of dust, to Weena&#39;s huge delight, I solemnly performed a kind of composite dance, whistling The Land of the Leal as cheerfully as I could. </span>
      <span id="f1360">In part it was a modest cancan, in part a step dance, in part a skirt-dance (so far as my tail-coat permitted), and in part original. </span>
      <span id="f1361">For I am naturally inventive, as you know.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1362">&#39;Now, I still think that for this box of matches to have escaped the wear of time for immemorial years was a most strange, as for me it was a most fortunate thing. </span>
      <span id="f1363">Yet, oddly enough, I found a far unlikelier substance, and that was camphor. </span>
      <span id="f1364">I found it in a sealed jar, that by chance, I suppose, had been really hermetically sealed. </span>
      <span id="f1365">I fancied at first that it was paraffin wax, and smashed the glass accordingly. </span>
      <span id="f1366">But the odour of camphor was unmistakable. </span>
      <span id="f1367">In the universal decay this volatile substance had chanced to survive, perhaps through many thousands of centuries. </span>
      <span id="f1368">It reminded me of a sepia painting I had once seen done from the ink of a fossil Belemnite that must have perished and become fossilized millions of years ago. </span>
      <span id="f1369">I was about to throw it away, but I remembered that it was inflammable and burned with a good bright flame—was, in fact, an excellent candle—and I put it in my pocket. </span>
      <span id="f1370">I found no explosives, however, nor any means of breaking down the bronze doors. </span>
      <span id="f1371">As yet my iron crowbar was the most helpful thing I had chanced upon. </span>
      <span id="f1372">Nevertheless I left that gallery greatly elated.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1373">&#39;I cannot tell you all the story of that long afternoon. </span>
      <span id="f1374">It would require a great effort of memory to recall my explorations in at all the proper order. </span>
      <span id="f1375">I remember a long gallery of rusting stands of arms, and how I hesitated between my crowbar and a hatchet or a sword. </span>
      <span id="f1376">I could not carry both, however, and my bar of iron promised best against the bronze gates. </span>
      <span id="f1377">There were numbers of guns, pistols, and rifles. </span>
      <span id="f1378">The most were masses of rust, but many were of some new metal, and still fairly sound. </span>
      <span id="f1379">But any cartridges or powder there may once have been had rotted into dust. </span>
      <span id="f1380">One corner I saw was charred and shattered; perhaps, I thought, by an explosion among the specimens. </span>
      <span id="f1381">In another place was a vast array of idols—Polynesian, Mexican, Grecian, Phoenician, every country on earth I should think. </span>
      <span id="f1382">And here, yielding to an irresistible impulse, I wrote my name upon the nose of a steatite monster from South America that particularly took my fancy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1383">&#39;As the evening drew on, my interest waned. </span>
      <span id="f1384">I went through gallery after gallery, dusty, silent, often ruinous, the exhibits sometimes mere heaps of rust and lignite, sometimes fresher. </span>
      <span id="f1385">In one place I suddenly found myself near the model of a tin-mine, and then by the merest accident I discovered, in an air-tight case, two dynamite cartridges! </span>
      <span id="f1386">I shouted &#34;Eureka!&#34; and smashed the case with joy. </span>
      <span id="f1387">Then came a doubt. </span>
      <span id="f1388">I hesitated. </span>
      <span id="f1389">Then, selecting a little side gallery, I made my essay. </span>
      <span id="f1390">I never felt such a disappointment as I did in waiting five, ten, fifteen minutes for an explosion that never came. </span>
      <span id="f1391">Of course the things were dummies, as I might have guessed from their presence. </span>
      <span id="f1392">I really believe that had they not been so, I should have rushed off incontinently and blown Sphinx, bronze doors, and (as it proved) my chances of finding the Time Machine, all together into non-existence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1393">&#39;It was after that, I think, that we came to a little open court within the palace. </span>
      <span id="f1394">It was turfed, and had three fruit-trees. </span>
      <span id="f1395">So we rested and refreshed ourselves. </span>
      <span id="f1396">Towards sunset I began to consider our position. </span>
      <span id="f1397">Night was creeping upon us, and my inaccessible hiding-place had still to be found. </span>
      <span id="f1398">But that troubled me very little now. </span>
      <span id="f1399">I had in my possession a thing that was, perhaps, the best of all defences against the Morlocks—I had matches! </span>
      <span id="f1400">I had the camphor in my pocket, too, if a blaze were needed. </span>
      <span id="f1401">It seemed to me that the best thing we could do would be to pass the night in the open, protected by a fire. </span>
      <span id="f1402">In the morning there was the getting of the Time Machine. </span>
      <span id="f1403">Towards that, as yet, I had only my iron mace. </span>
      <span id="f1404">But now, with my growing knowledge, I felt very differently towards those bronze doors. </span>
      <span id="f1405">Up to this, I had refrained from forcing them, largely because of the mystery on the other side. </span>
      <span id="f1406">They had never impressed me as being very strong, and I hoped to find my bar of iron not altogether inadequate for the work.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>