<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1407">CHAPTER IX</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1408">&#39;We emerged from the palace while the sun was still in part above the horizon. </span>
      <span id="f1409">I was determined to reach the White Sphinx early the next morning, and ere the dusk I purposed pushing through the woods that had stopped me on the previous journey. </span>
      <span id="f1410">My plan was to go as far as possible that night, and then, building a fire, to sleep in the protection of its glare. </span>
      <span id="f1411">Accordingly, as we went along I gathered any sticks or dried grass I saw, and presently had my arms full of such litter. </span>
      <span id="f1412">Thus loaded, our progress was slower than I had anticipated, and besides Weena was tired. </span>
      <span id="f1413">And I began to suffer from sleepiness too; so that it was full night before we reached the wood. </span>
      <span id="f1414">Upon the shrubby hill of its edge Weena would have stopped, fearing the darkness before us; but a singular sense of impending calamity, that should indeed have served me as a warning, drove me onward. </span>
      <span id="f1415">I had been without sleep for a night and two days, and I was feverish and irritable. </span>
      <span id="f1416">I felt sleep coming upon me, and the Morlocks with it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1417">&#39;While we hesitated, among the black bushes behind us, and dim against their blackness, I saw three crouching figures. </span>
      <span id="f1418">There was scrub and long grass all about us, and I did not feel safe from their insidious approach. </span>
      <span id="f1419">The forest, I calculated, was rather less than a mile across. </span>
      <span id="f1420">If we could get through it to the bare hill-side, there, as it seemed to me, was an altogether safer resting-place; I thought that with my matches and my camphor I could contrive to keep my path illuminated through the woods. </span>
      <span id="f1421">Yet it was evident that if I was to flourish matches with my hands I should have to abandon my firewood; so, rather reluctantly, I put it down. </span>
      <span id="f1422">And then it came into my head that I would amaze our friends behind by lighting it. </span>
      <span id="f1423">I was to discover the atrocious folly of this proceeding, but it came to my mind as an ingenious move for covering our retreat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1424">&#39;I don&#39;t know if you have ever thought what a rare thing flame must be in the absence of man and in a temperate climate. </span>
      <span id="f1425">The sun&#39;s heat is rarely strong enough to burn, even when it is focused by dewdrops, as is sometimes the case in more tropical districts. </span>
      <span id="f1426">Lightning may blast and blacken, but it rarely gives rise to widespread fire. </span>
      <span id="f1427">Decaying vegetation may occasionally smoulder with the heat of its fermentation, but this rarely results in flame. </span>
      <span id="f1428">In this decadence, too, the art of fire-making had been forgotten on the earth. </span>
      <span id="f1429">The red tongues that went licking up my heap of wood were an altogether new and strange thing to Weena.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1430">&#39;She wanted to run to it and play with it. </span>
      <span id="f1431">I believe she would have cast herself into it had I not restrained her. </span>
      <span id="f1432">But I caught her up, and in spite of her struggles, plunged boldly before me into the wood. </span>
      <span id="f1433">For a little way the glare of my fire lit the path. </span>
      <span id="f1434">Looking back presently, I could see, through the crowded stems, that from my heap of sticks the blaze had spread to some bushes adjacent, and a curved line of fire was creeping up the grass of the hill. </span>
      <span id="f1435">I laughed at that, and turned again to the dark trees before me. </span>
      <span id="f1436">It was very black, and Weena clung to me convulsively, but there was still, as my eyes grew accustomed to the darkness, sufficient light for me to avoid the stems. </span>
      <span id="f1437">Overhead it was simply black, except where a gap of remote blue sky shone down upon us here and there. </span>
      <span id="f1438">I struck none of my matches because I had no hand free. </span>
      <span id="f1439">Upon my left arm I carried my little one, in my right hand I had my iron bar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1440">&#39;For some way I heard nothing but the crackling twigs under my feet, the faint rustle of the breeze above, and my own breathing and the throb of the blood-vessels in my ears. </span>
      <span id="f1441">Then I seemed to know of a pattering about me. </span>
      <span id="f1442">I pushed on grimly. </span>
      <span id="f1443">The pattering grew more distinct, and then I caught the same queer sound and voices I had heard in the Under-world. </span>
      <span id="f1444">There were evidently several of the Morlocks, and they were closing in upon me. </span>
      <span id="f1445">Indeed, in another minute I felt a tug at my coat, then something at my arm. </span>
      <span id="f1446">And Weena shivered violently, and became quite still.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1447">&#39;It was time for a match. </span>
      <span id="f1448">But to get one I must put her down. </span>
      <span id="f1449">I did so, and, as I fumbled with my pocket, a struggle began in the darkness about my knees, perfectly silent on her part and with the same peculiar cooing sounds from the Morlocks. </span>
      <span id="f1450">Soft little hands, too, were creeping over my coat and back, touching even my neck. </span>
      <span id="f1451">Then the match scratched and fizzed. </span>
      <span id="f1452">I held it flaring, and saw the white backs of the Morlocks in flight amid the trees. </span>
      <span id="f1453">I hastily took a lump of camphor from my pocket, and prepared to light it as soon as the match should wane. </span>
      <span id="f1454">Then I looked at Weena. </span>
      <span id="f1455">She was lying clutching my feet and quite motionless, with her face to the ground. </span>
      <span id="f1456">With a sudden fright I stooped to her. </span>
      <span id="f1457">She seemed scarcely to breathe. </span>
      <span id="f1458">I lit the block of camphor and flung it to the ground, and as it split and flared up and drove back the Morlocks and the shadows, I knelt down and lifted her. </span>
      <span id="f1459">The wood behind seemed full of the stir and murmur of a great company!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1460">&#39;She seemed to have fainted. </span>
      <span id="f1461">I put her carefully upon my shoulder and rose to push on, and then there came a horrible realization. </span>
      <span id="f1462">In manoeuvring with my matches and Weena, I had turned myself about several times, and now I had not the faintest idea in what direction lay my path. </span>
      <span id="f1463">For all I knew, I might be facing back towards the Palace of Green Porcelain. </span>
      <span id="f1464">I found myself in a cold sweat. </span>
      <span id="f1465">I had to think rapidly what to do. </span>
      <span id="f1466">I determined to build a fire and encamp where we were. </span>
      <span id="f1467">I put Weena, still motionless, down upon a turfy bole, and very hastily, as my first lump of camphor waned, I began collecting sticks and leaves. </span>
      <span id="f1468">Here and there out of the darkness round me the Morlocks&#39; eyes shone like carbuncles.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1469">&#39;The camphor flickered and went out. </span>
      <span id="f1470">I lit a match, and as I did so, two white forms that had been approaching Weena dashed hastily away. </span>
      <span id="f1471">One was so blinded by the light that he came straight for me, and I felt his bones grind under the blow of my fist. </span>
      <span id="f1472">He gave a whoop of dismay, staggered a little way, and fell down. </span>
      <span id="f1473">I lit another piece of camphor, and went on gathering my bonfire. </span>
      <span id="f1474">Presently I noticed how dry was some of the foliage above me, for since my arrival on the Time Machine, a matter of a week, no rain had fallen. </span>
      <span id="f1475">So, instead of casting about among the trees for fallen twigs, I began leaping up and dragging down branches. </span>
      <span id="f1476">Very soon I had a choking smoky fire of green wood and dry sticks, and could economize my camphor. </span>
      <span id="f1477">Then I turned to where Weena lay beside my iron mace. </span>
      <span id="f1478">I tried what I could to revive her, but she lay like one dead. </span>
      <span id="f1479">I could not even satisfy myself whether or not she breathed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1480">&#39;Now, the smoke of the fire beat over towards me, and it must have made me heavy of a sudden. </span>
      <span id="f1481">Moreover, the vapour of camphor was in the air. </span>
      <span id="f1482">My fire would not need replenishing for an hour or so. </span>
      <span id="f1483">I felt very weary after my exertion, and sat down. </span>
      <span id="f1484">The wood, too, was full of a slumbrous murmur that I did not understand. </span>
      <span id="f1485">I seemed just to nod and open my eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1486">But all was dark, and the Morlocks had their hands upon me. </span>
      <span id="f1487">Flinging off their clinging fingers I hastily felt in my pocket for the match-box, and—it had gone! </span>
      <span id="f1488">Then they gripped and closed with me again. </span>
      <span id="f1489">In a moment I knew what had happened. </span>
      <span id="f1490">I had slept, and my fire had gone out, and the bitterness of death came over my soul. </span>
      <span id="f1491">The forest seemed full of the smell of burning wood. </span>
      <span id="f1492">I was caught by the neck, by the hair, by the arms, and pulled down. </span>
      <span id="f1493">It was indescribably horrible in the darkness to feel all these soft creatures heaped upon me. </span>
      <span id="f1494">I felt as if I was in a monstrous spider&#39;s web. </span>
      <span id="f1495">I was overpowered, and went down. </span>
      <span id="f1496">I felt little teeth nipping at my neck. </span>
      <span id="f1497">I rolled over, and as I did so my hand came against my iron lever. </span>
      <span id="f1498">It gave me strength. </span>
      <span id="f1499">I struggled up, shaking the human rats from me, and, holding the bar short, I thrust where I judged their faces might be. </span>
      <span id="f1500">I could feel the succulent giving of flesh and bone under my blows, and for a moment I was free.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1501">&#39;The strange exultation that so often seems to accompany hard fighting came upon me. </span>
      <span id="f1502">I knew that both I and Weena were lost, but I determined to make the Morlocks pay for their meat. </span>
      <span id="f1503">I stood with my back to a tree, swinging the iron bar before me. </span>
      <span id="f1504">The whole wood was full of the stir and cries of them. </span>
      <span id="f1505">A minute passed. </span>
      <span id="f1506">Their voices seemed to rise to a higher pitch of excitement, and their movements grew faster. </span>
      <span id="f1507">Yet none came within reach. </span>
      <span id="f1508">I stood glaring at the blackness. </span>
      <span id="f1509">Then suddenly came hope. </span>
      <span id="f1510">What if the Morlocks were afraid? </span>
      <span id="f1511">And close on the heels of that came a strange thing. </span>
      <span id="f1512">The darkness seemed to grow luminous. </span>
      <span id="f1513">Very dimly I began to see the Morlocks about me—three battered at my feet—and then I recognized, with incredulous surprise, that the others were running, in an incessant stream, as it seemed, from behind me, and away through the wood in front. </span>
      <span id="f1514">And their backs seemed no longer white, but reddish. </span>
      <span id="f1515">As I stood agape, I saw a little red spark go drifting across a gap of starlight between the branches, and vanish. </span>
      <span id="f1516">And at that I understood the smell of burning wood, the slumbrous murmur that was growing now into a gusty roar, the red glow, and the Morlocks&#39; flight.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1517">&#39;Stepping out from behind my tree and looking back, I saw, through the black pillars of the nearer trees, the flames of the burning forest. </span>
      <span id="f1518">It was my first fire coming after me. </span>
      <span id="f1519">With that I looked for Weena, but she was gone. </span>
      <span id="f1520">The hissing and crackling behind me, the explosive thud as each fresh tree burst into flame, left little time for reflection. </span>
      <span id="f1521">My iron bar still gripped, I followed in the Morlocks&#39; path. </span>
      <span id="f1522">It was a close race. </span>
      <span id="f1523">Once the flames crept forward so swiftly on my right as I ran that I was outflanked and had to strike off to the left. </span>
      <span id="f1524">But at last I emerged upon a small open space, and as I did so, a Morlock came blundering towards me, and past me, and went on straight into the fire!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1525">&#39;And now I was to see the most weird and horrible thing, I think, of all that I beheld in that future age. </span>
      <span id="f1526">This whole space was as bright as day with the reflection of the fire. </span>
      <span id="f1527">In the centre was a hillock or tumulus, surmounted by a scorched hawthorn. </span>
      <span id="f1528">Beyond this was another arm of the burning forest, with yellow tongues already writhing from it, completely encircling the space with a fence of fire. </span>
      <span id="f1529">Upon the hill-side were some thirty or forty Morlocks, dazzled by the light and heat, and blundering hither and thither against each other in their bewilderment. </span>
      <span id="f1530">At first I did not realize their blindness, and struck furiously at them with my bar, in a frenzy of fear, as they approached me, killing one and crippling several more. </span>
      <span id="f1531">But when I had watched the gestures of one of them groping under the hawthorn against the red sky, and heard their moans, I was assured of their absolute helplessness and misery in the glare, and I struck no more of them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1532">&#39;Yet every now and then one would come straight towards me, setting loose a quivering horror that made me quick to elude him. </span>
      <span id="f1533">At one time the flames died down somewhat, and I feared the foul creatures would presently be able to see me. </span>
      <span id="f1534">I was thinking of beginning the fight by killing some of them before this should happen; but the fire burst out again brightly, and I stayed my hand. </span>
      <span id="f1535">I walked about the hill among them and avoided them, looking for some trace of Weena. </span>
      <span id="f1536">But Weena was gone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1537">&#39;At last I sat down on the summit of the hillock, and watched this strange incredible company of blind things groping to and fro, and making uncanny noises to each other, as the glare of the fire beat on them. </span>
      <span id="f1538">The coiling uprush of smoke streamed across the sky, and through the rare tatters of that red canopy, remote as though they belonged to another universe, shone the little stars. </span>
      <span id="f1539">Two or three Morlocks came blundering into me, and I drove them off with blows of my fists, trembling as I did so.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1540">&#39;For the most part of that night I was persuaded it was a nightmare. </span>
      <span id="f1541">I bit myself and screamed in a passionate desire to awake. </span>
      <span id="f1542">I beat the ground with my hands, and got up and sat down again, and wandered here and there, and again sat down. </span>
      <span id="f1543">Then I would fall to rubbing my eyes and calling upon God to let me awake. </span>
      <span id="f1544">Thrice I saw Morlocks put their heads down in a kind of agony and rush into the flames. </span>
      <span id="f1545">But, at last, above the subsiding red of the fire, above the streaming masses of black smoke and the whitening and blackening tree stumps, and the diminishing numbers of these dim creatures, came the white light of the day.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1546">&#39;I searched again for traces of Weena, but there were none. </span>
      <span id="f1547">It was plain that they had left her poor little body in the forest. </span>
      <span id="f1548">I cannot describe how it relieved me to think that it had escaped the awful fate to which it seemed destined. </span>
      <span id="f1549">As I thought of that, I was almost moved to begin a massacre of the helpless abominations about me, but I contained myself. </span>
      <span id="f1550">The hillock, as I have said, was a kind of island in the forest. </span>
      <span id="f1551">From its summit I could now make out through a haze of smoke the Palace of Green Porcelain, and from that I could get my bearings for the White Sphinx. </span>
      <span id="f1552">And so, leaving the remnant of these damned souls still going hither and thither and moaning, as the day grew clearer, I tied some grass about my feet and limped on across smoking ashes and among black stems, that still pulsated internally with fire, towards the hiding-place of the Time Machine. </span>
      <span id="f1553">I walked slowly, for I was almost exhausted, as well as lame, and I felt the intensest wretchedness for the horrible death of little Weena. </span>
      <span id="f1554">It seemed an overwhelming calamity. </span>
      <span id="f1555">Now, in this old familiar room, it is more like the sorrow of a dream than an actual loss. </span>
      <span id="f1556">But that morning it left me absolutely lonely again—terribly alone. </span>
      <span id="f1557">I began to think of this house of mine, of this fireside, of some of you, and with such thoughts came a longing that was pain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1558">&#39;But as I walked over the smoking ashes under the bright morning sky, I made a discovery. </span>
      <span id="f1559">In my trouser pocket were still some loose matches. </span>
      <span id="f1560">The box must have leaked before it was lost.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>