<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1561">CHAPTER X</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1562">&#39;About eight or nine in the morning I came to the same seat of yellow metal from which I had viewed the world upon the evening of my arrival. </span>
      <span id="f1563">I thought of my hasty conclusions upon that evening and could not refrain from laughing bitterly at my confidence. </span>
      <span id="f1564">Here was the same beautiful scene, the same abundant foliage, the same splendid palaces and magnificent ruins, the same silver river running between its fertile banks. </span>
      <span id="f1565">The gay robes of the beautiful people moved hither and thither among the trees. </span>
      <span id="f1566">Some were bathing in exactly the place where I had saved Weena, and that suddenly gave me a keen stab of pain. </span>
      <span id="f1567">And like blots upon the landscape rose the cupolas above the ways to the Under-world. </span>
      <span id="f1568">I understood now what all the beauty of the Over-world people covered. </span>
      <span id="f1569">Very pleasant was their day, as pleasant as the day of the cattle in the field. </span>
      <span id="f1570">Like the cattle, they knew of no enemies and provided against no needs. </span>
      <span id="f1571">And their end was the same.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1572">&#39;I grieved to think how brief the dream of the human intellect had been. </span>
      <span id="f1573">It had committed suicide. </span>
      <span id="f1574">It had set itself steadfastly towards comfort and ease, a balanced society with security and permanency as its watchword, it had attained its hopes—to come to this at last. </span>
      <span id="f1575">Once, life and property must have reached almost absolute safety. </span>
      <span id="f1576">The rich had been assured of his wealth and comfort, the toiler assured of his life and work. </span>
      <span id="f1577">No doubt in that perfect world there had been no unemployed problem, no social question left unsolved. </span>
      <span id="f1578">And a great quiet had followed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1579">&#39;It is a law of nature we overlook, that intellectual versatility is the compensation for change, danger, and trouble. </span>
      <span id="f1580">An animal perfectly in harmony with its environment is a perfect mechanism. </span>
      <span id="f1581">Nature never appeals to intelligence until habit and instinct are useless. </span>
      <span id="f1582">There is no intelligence where there is no change and no need of change. </span>
      <span id="f1583">Only those animals partake of intelligence that have to meet a huge variety of needs and dangers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1584">&#39;So, as I see it, the Upper-world man had drifted towards his feeble prettiness, and the Under-world to mere mechanical industry. </span>
      <span id="f1585">But that perfect state had lacked one thing even for mechanical perfection—absolute permanency. </span>
      <span id="f1586">Apparently as time went on, the feeding of the Under-world, however it was effected, had become disjointed. </span>
      <span id="f1587">Mother Necessity, who had been staved off for a few thousand years, came back again, and she began below. </span>
      <span id="f1588">The Under-world being in contact with machinery, which, however perfect, still needs some little thought outside habit, had probably retained perforce rather more initiative, if less of every other human character, than the Upper. </span>
      <span id="f1589">And when other meat failed them, they turned to what old habit had hitherto forbidden. </span>
      <span id="f1590">So I say I saw it in my last view of the world of Eight Hundred and Two Thousand Seven Hundred and One. </span>
      <span id="f1591">It may be as wrong an explanation as mortal wit could invent. </span>
      <span id="f1592">It is how the thing shaped itself to me, and as that I give it to you.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1593">&#39;After the fatigues, excitements, and terrors of the past days, and in spite of my grief, this seat and the tranquil view and the warm sunlight were very pleasant. </span>
      <span id="f1594">I was very tired and sleepy, and soon my theorizing passed into dozing. </span>
      <span id="f1595">Catching myself at that, I took my own hint, and spreading myself out upon the turf I had a long and refreshing sleep.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1596">&#39;I awoke a little before sunsetting. </span>
      <span id="f1597">I now felt safe against being caught napping by the Morlocks, and, stretching myself, I came on down the hill towards the White Sphinx. </span>
      <span id="f1598">I had my crowbar in one hand, and the other hand played with the matches in my pocket.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1599">&#39;And now came a most unexpected thing. </span>
      <span id="f1600">As I approached the pedestal of the sphinx I found the bronze valves were open. </span>
      <span id="f1601">They had slid down into grooves.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1602">&#39;At that I stopped short before them, hesitating to enter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1603">&#39;Within was a small apartment, and on a raised place in the corner of this was the Time Machine. </span>
      <span id="f1604">I had the small levers in my pocket. </span>
      <span id="f1605">So here, after all my elaborate preparations for the siege of the White Sphinx, was a meek surrender. </span>
      <span id="f1606">I threw my iron bar away, almost sorry not to use it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1607">&#39;A sudden thought came into my head as I stooped towards the portal. </span>
      <span id="f1608">For once, at least, I grasped the mental operations of the Morlocks. </span>
      <span id="f1609">Suppressing a strong inclination to laugh, I stepped through the bronze frame and up to the Time Machine. </span>
      <span id="f1610">I was surprised to find it had been carefully oiled and cleaned. </span>
      <span id="f1611">I have suspected since that the Morlocks had even partially taken it to pieces while trying in their dim way to grasp its purpose.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1612">&#39;Now as I stood and examined it, finding a pleasure in the mere touch of the contrivance, the thing I had expected happened. </span>
      <span id="f1613">The bronze panels suddenly slid up and struck the frame with a clang. </span>
      <span id="f1614">I was in the dark—trapped. </span>
      <span id="f1615">So the Morlocks thought. </span>
      <span id="f1616">At that I chuckled gleefully.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1617">&#39;I could already hear their murmuring laughter as they came towards me. </span>
      <span id="f1618">Very calmly I tried to strike the match. </span>
      <span id="f1619">I had only to fix on the levers and depart then like a ghost. </span>
      <span id="f1620">But I had overlooked one little thing. </span>
      <span id="f1621">The matches were of that abominable kind that light only on the box.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1622">&#39;You may imagine how all my calm vanished. </span>
      <span id="f1623">The little brutes were close upon me. </span>
      <span id="f1624">One touched me. </span>
      <span id="f1625">I made a sweeping blow in the dark at them with the levers, and began to scramble into the saddle of the machine. </span>
      <span id="f1626">Then came one hand upon me and then another. </span>
      <span id="f1627">Then I had simply to fight against their persistent fingers for my levers, and at the same time feel for the studs over which these fitted. </span>
      <span id="f1628">One, indeed, they almost got away from me. </span>
      <span id="f1629">As it slipped from my hand, I had to butt in the dark with my head—I could hear the Morlock&#39;s skull ring—to recover it. </span>
      <span id="f1630">It was a nearer thing than the fight in the forest, I think, this last scramble.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1631">&#39;But at last the lever was fitted and pulled over. </span>
      <span id="f1632">The clinging hands slipped from me. </span>
      <span id="f1633">The darkness presently fell from my eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1634">I found myself in the same grey light and tumult I have already described.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>