<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1635">CHAPTER XI</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1636">&#39;I have already told you of the sickness and confusion that comes with time travelling. </span>
      <span id="f1637">And this time I was not seated properly in the saddle, but sideways and in an unstable fashion. </span>
      <span id="f1638">For an indefinite time I clung to the machine as it swayed and vibrated, quite unheeding how I went, and when I brought myself to look at the dials again I was amazed to find where I had arrived. </span>
      <span id="f1639">One dial records days, and another thousands of days, another millions of days, and another thousands of millions. </span>
      <span id="f1640">Now, instead of reversing the levers, I had pulled them over so as to go forward with them, and when I came to look at these indicators I found that the thousands hand was sweeping round as fast as the seconds hand of a watch—into futurity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1641">&#39;As I drove on, a peculiar change crept over the appearance of things. </span>
      <span id="f1642">The palpitating greyness grew darker; then—though I was still travelling with prodigious velocity—the blinking succession of day and night, which was usually indicative of a slower pace, returned, and grew more and more marked. </span>
      <span id="f1643">This puzzled me very much at first. </span>
      <span id="f1644">The alternations of night and day grew slower and slower, and so did the passage of the sun across the sky, until they seemed to stretch through centuries. </span>
      <span id="f1645">At last a steady twilight brooded over the earth, a twilight only broken now and then when a comet glared across the darkling sky. </span>
      <span id="f1646">The band of light that had indicated the sun had long since disappeared; for the sun had ceased to set—it simply rose and fell in the west, and grew ever broader and more red. </span>
      <span id="f1647">All trace of the moon had vanished. </span>
      <span id="f1648">The circling of the stars, growing slower and slower, had given place to creeping points of light. </span>
      <span id="f1649">At last, some time before I stopped, the sun, red and very large, halted motionless upon the horizon, a vast dome glowing with a dull heat, and now and then suffering a momentary extinction. </span>
      <span id="f1650">At one time it had for a little while glowed more brilliantly again, but it speedily reverted to its sullen red heat. </span>
      <span id="f1651">I perceived by this slowing down of its rising and setting that the work of the tidal drag was done. </span>
      <span id="f1652">The earth had come to rest with one face to the sun, even as in our own time the moon faces the earth. </span>
      <span id="f1653">Very cautiously, for I remembered my former headlong fall, I began to reverse my motion. </span>
      <span id="f1654">Slower and slower went the circling hands until the thousands one seemed motionless and the daily one was no longer a mere mist upon its scale. </span>
      <span id="f1655">Still slower, until the dim outlines of a desolate beach grew visible.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1656">&#39;I stopped very gently and sat upon the Time Machine, looking round. </span>
      <span id="f1657">The sky was no longer blue. </span>
      <span id="f1658">North-eastward it was inky black, and out of the blackness shone brightly and steadily the pale white stars. </span>
      <span id="f1659">Overhead it was a deep Indian red and starless, and south-eastward it grew brighter to a glowing scarlet where, cut by the horizon, lay the huge hull of the sun, red and motionless. </span>
      <span id="f1660">The rocks about me were of a harsh reddish colour, and all the trace of life that I could see at first was the intensely green vegetation that covered every projecting point on their south-eastern face. </span>
      <span id="f1661">It was the same rich green that one sees on forest moss or on the lichen in caves: plants which like these grow in a perpetual twilight.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1662">&#39;The machine was standing on a sloping beach. </span>
      <span id="f1663">The sea stretched away to the south-west, to rise into a sharp bright horizon against the wan sky. </span>
      <span id="f1664">There were no breakers and no waves, for not a breath of wind was stirring. </span>
      <span id="f1665">Only a slight oily swell rose and fell like a gentle breathing, and showed that the eternal sea was still moving and living. </span>
      <span id="f1666">And along the margin where the water sometimes broke was a thick incrustation of salt—pink under the lurid sky. </span>
      <span id="f1667">There was a sense of oppression in my head, and I noticed that I was breathing very fast. </span>
      <span id="f1668">The sensation reminded me of my only experience of mountaineering, and from that I judged the air to be more rarefied than it is now.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1669">&#39;Far away up the desolate slope I heard a harsh scream, and saw a thing like a huge white butterfly go slanting and fluttering up into the sky and, circling, disappear over some low hillocks beyond. </span>
      <span id="f1670">The sound of its voice was so dismal that I shivered and seated myself more firmly upon the machine. </span>
      <span id="f1671">Looking round me again, I saw that, quite near, what I had taken to be a reddish mass of rock was moving slowly towards me. </span>
      <span id="f1672">Then I saw the thing was really a monstrous crab-like creature. </span>
      <span id="f1673">Can you imagine a crab as large as yonder table, with its many legs moving slowly and uncertainly, its big claws swaying, its long antennae, like carters&#39; whips, waving and feeling, and its stalked eyes gleaming at you on either side of its metallic front? </span>
      <span id="f1674">Its back was corrugated and ornamented with ungainly bosses, and a greenish incrustation blotched it here and there. </span>
      <span id="f1675">I could see the many palps of its complicated mouth flickering and feeling as it moved.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1676">&#39;As I stared at this sinister apparition crawling towards me, I felt a tickling on my cheek as though a fly had lighted there. </span>
      <span id="f1677">I tried to brush it away with my hand, but in a moment it returned, and almost immediately came another by my ear. </span>
      <span id="f1678">I struck at this, and caught something threadlike. </span>
      <span id="f1679">It was drawn swiftly out of my hand. </span>
      <span id="f1680">With a frightful qualm, I turned, and I saw that I had grasped the antenna of another monster crab that stood just behind me. </span>
      <span id="f1681">Its evil eyes were wriggling on their stalks, its mouth was all alive with appetite, and its vast ungainly claws, smeared with an algal slime, were descending upon me. </span>
      <span id="f1682">In a moment my hand was on the lever, and I had placed a month between myself and these monsters. </span>
      <span id="f1683">But I was still on the same beach, and I saw them distinctly now as soon as I stopped. </span>
      <span id="f1684">Dozens of them seemed to be crawling here and there, in the sombre light, among the foliated sheets of intense green.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1685">&#39;I cannot convey the sense of abominable desolation that hung over the world. </span>
      <span id="f1686">The red eastern sky, the northward blackness, the salt Dead Sea, the stony beach crawling with these foul, slow-stirring monsters, the uniform poisonous-looking green of the lichenous plants, the thin air that hurts one&#39;s lungs: all contributed to an appalling effect. </span>
      <span id="f1687">I moved on a hundred years, and there was the same red sun—a little larger, a little duller—the same dying sea, the same chill air, and the same crowd of earthy crustacea creeping in and out among the green weed and the red rocks. </span>
      <span id="f1688">And in the westward sky, I saw a curved pale line like a vast new moon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1689">&#39;So I travelled, stopping ever and again, in great strides of a thousand years or more, drawn on by the mystery of the earth&#39;s fate, watching with a strange fascination the sun grow larger and duller in the westward sky, and the life of the old earth ebb away. </span>
      <span id="f1690">At last, more than thirty million years hence, the huge red-hot dome of the sun had come to obscure nearly a tenth part of the darkling heavens. </span>
      <span id="f1691">Then I stopped once more, for the crawling multitude of crabs had disappeared, and the red beach, save for its livid green liverworts and lichens, seemed lifeless. </span>
      <span id="f1692">And now it was flecked with white. </span>
      <span id="f1693">A bitter cold assailed me. </span>
      <span id="f1694">Rare white flakes ever and again came eddying down. </span>
      <span id="f1695">To the north-eastward, the glare of snow lay under the starlight of the sable sky and I could see an undulating crest of hillocks pinkish white. </span>
      <span id="f1696">There were fringes of ice along the sea margin, with drifting masses further out; but the main expanse of that salt ocean, all bloody under the eternal sunset, was still unfrozen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1697">&#39;I looked about me to see if any traces of animal life remained. </span>
      <span id="f1698">A certain indefinable apprehension still kept me in the saddle of the machine. </span>
      <span id="f1699">But I saw nothing moving, in earth or sky or sea. </span>
      <span id="f1700">The green slime on the rocks alone testified that life was not extinct. </span>
      <span id="f1701">A shallow sandbank had appeared in the sea and the water had receded from the beach. </span>
      <span id="f1702">I fancied I saw some black object flopping about upon this bank, but it became motionless as I looked at it, and I judged that my eye had been deceived, and that the black object was merely a rock. </span>
      <span id="f1703">The stars in the sky were intensely bright and seemed to me to twinkle very little.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1704">&#39;Suddenly I noticed that the circular westward outline of the sun had changed; that a concavity, a bay, had appeared in the curve. </span>
      <span id="f1705">I saw this grow larger. </span>
      <span id="f1706">For a minute perhaps I stared aghast at this blackness that was creeping over the day, and then I realized that an eclipse was beginning. </span>
      <span id="f1707">Either the moon or the planet Mercury was passing across the sun&#39;s disk. </span>
      <span id="f1708">Naturally, at first I took it to be the moon, but there is much to incline me to believe that what I really saw was the transit of an inner planet passing very near to the earth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1709">&#39;The darkness grew apace; a cold wind began to blow in freshening gusts from the east, and the showering white flakes in the air increased in number. </span>
      <span id="f1710">From the edge of the sea came a ripple and whisper. </span>
      <span id="f1711">Beyond these lifeless sounds the world was silent. </span>
      <span id="f1712">Silent? </span>
      <span id="f1713">It would be hard to convey the stillness of it. </span>
      <span id="f1714">All the sounds of man, the bleating of sheep, the cries of birds, the hum of insects, the stir that makes the background of our lives—all that was over. </span>
      <span id="f1715">As the darkness thickened, the eddying flakes grew more abundant, dancing before my eyes; and the cold of the air more intense. </span>
      <span id="f1716">At last, one by one, swiftly, one after the other, the white peaks of the distant hills vanished into blackness. </span>
      <span id="f1717">The breeze rose to a moaning wind. </span>
      <span id="f1718">I saw the black central shadow of the eclipse sweeping towards me. </span>
      <span id="f1719">In another moment the pale stars alone were visible. </span>
      <span id="f1720">All else was rayless obscurity. </span>
      <span id="f1721">The sky was absolutely black.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1722">&#39;A horror of this great darkness came on me. </span>
      <span id="f1723">The cold, that smote to my marrow, and the pain I felt in breathing, overcame me. </span>
      <span id="f1724">I shivered, and a deadly nausea seized me. </span>
      <span id="f1725">Then like a red-hot bow in the sky appeared the edge of the sun. </span>
      <span id="f1726">I got off the machine to recover myself. </span>
      <span id="f1727">I felt giddy and incapable of facing the return journey. </span>
      <span id="f1728">As I stood sick and confused I saw again the moving thing upon the shoal—there was no mistake now that it was a moving thing—against the red water of the sea. </span>
      <span id="f1729">It was a round thing, the size of a football perhaps, or, it may be, bigger, and tentacles trailed down from it; it seemed black against the weltering blood-red water, and it was hopping fitfully about. </span>
      <span id="f1730">Then I felt I was fainting. </span>
      <span id="f1731">But a terrible dread of lying helpless in that remote and awful twilight sustained me while I clambered upon the saddle.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>