<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1732">CHAPTER XII &amp; EPILOGUE</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1733">&#39;So I came back. </span>
      <span id="f1734">For a long time I must have been insensible upon the machine. </span>
      <span id="f1735">The blinking succession of the days and nights was resumed, the sun got golden again, the sky blue. </span>
      <span id="f1736">I breathed with greater freedom. </span>
      <span id="f1737">The fluctuating contours of the land ebbed and flowed. </span>
      <span id="f1738">The hands spun backward upon the dials. </span>
      <span id="f1739">At last I saw again the dim shadows of houses, the evidences of decadent humanity. </span>
      <span id="f1740">These, too, changed and passed, and others came. </span>
      <span id="f1741">Presently, when the million dial was at zero, I slackened speed. </span>
      <span id="f1742">I began to recognize our own petty and familiar architecture, the thousands hand ran back to the starting-point, the night and day flapped slower and slower. </span>
      <span id="f1743">Then the old walls of the laboratory came round me. </span>
      <span id="f1744">Very gently, now, I slowed the mechanism down.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1745">&#39;I saw one little thing that seemed odd to me. </span>
      <span id="f1746">I think I have told you that when I set out, before my velocity became very high, Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1747">Watchett had walked across the room, travelling, as it seemed to me, like a rocket. </span>
      <span id="f1748">As I returned, I passed again across that minute when she traversed the laboratory. </span>
      <span id="f1749">But now her every motion appeared to be the exact inversion of her previous ones. </span>
      <span id="f1750">The door at the lower end opened, and she glided quietly up the laboratory, back foremost, and disappeared behind the door by which she had previously entered. </span>
      <span id="f1751">Just before that I seemed to see Hillyer for a moment; but he passed like a flash.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1752">&#39;Then I stopped the machine, and saw about me again the old familiar laboratory, my tools, my appliances just as I had left them. </span>
      <span id="f1753">I got off the thing very shakily, and sat down upon my bench. </span>
      <span id="f1754">For several minutes I trembled violently. </span>
      <span id="f1755">Then I became calmer. </span>
      <span id="f1756">Around me was my old workshop again, exactly as it had been. </span>
      <span id="f1757">I might have slept there, and the whole thing have been a dream.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1758">&#39;And yet, not exactly! </span>
      <span id="f1759">The thing had started from the south-east corner of the laboratory. </span>
      <span id="f1760">It had come to rest again in the north-west, against the wall where you saw it. </span>
      <span id="f1761">That gives you the exact distance from my little lawn to the pedestal of the White Sphinx, into which the Morlocks had carried my machine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1762">&#39;For a time my brain went stagnant. </span>
      <span id="f1763">Presently I got up and came through the passage here, limping, because my heel was still painful, and feeling sorely begrimed. </span>
      <span id="f1764">I saw the Pall Mall Gazette on the table by the door. </span>
      <span id="f1765">I found the date was indeed to-day, and looking at the timepiece, saw the hour was almost eight o&#39;clock. </span>
      <span id="f1766">I heard your voices and the clatter of plates. </span>
      <span id="f1767">I hesitated—I felt so sick and weak. </span>
      <span id="f1768">Then I sniffed good wholesome meat, and opened the door on you. </span>
      <span id="f1769">You know the rest. </span>
      <span id="f1770">I washed, and dined, and now I am telling you the story.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1771">&#39;I know,&#39; he said, after a pause, &#39;that all this will be absolutely incredible to you. </span>
      <span id="f1772">To me the one incredible thing is that I am here to-night in this old familiar room looking into your friendly faces and telling you these strange adventures.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1773">He looked at the Medical Man. </span>
      <span id="f1774">&#39;No. </span>
      <span id="f1775">I cannot expect you to believe it. </span>
      <span id="f1776">Take it as a lie—or a prophecy. </span>
      <span id="f1777">Say I dreamed it in the workshop. </span>
      <span id="f1778">Consider I have been speculating upon the destinies of our race until I have hatched this fiction. </span>
      <span id="f1779">Treat my assertion of its truth as a mere stroke of art to enhance its interest. </span>
      <span id="f1780">And taking it as a story, what do you think of it?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1781">He took up his pipe, and began, in his old accustomed manner, to tap with it nervously upon the bars of the grate. </span>
      <span id="f1782">There was a momentary stillness. </span>
      <span id="f1783">Then chairs began to creak and shoes to scrape upon the carpet. </span>
      <span id="f1784">I took my eyes off the Time Traveller&#39;s face, and looked round at his audience. </span>
      <span id="f1785">They were in the dark, and little spots of colour swam before them. </span>
      <span id="f1786">The Medical Man seemed absorbed in the contemplation of our host. </span>
      <span id="f1787">The Editor was looking hard at the end of his cigar—the sixth. </span>
      <span id="f1788">The Journalist fumbled for his watch. </span>
      <span id="f1789">The others, as far as I remember, were motionless.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1790">The Editor stood up with a sigh. </span>
      <span id="f1791">&#39;What a pity it is you&#39;re not a writer of stories!&#39; he said, putting his hand on the Time Traveller&#39;s shoulder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1792">&#39;You don&#39;t believe it?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1793">&#39;Well——&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1794">&#39;I thought not.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1795">The Time Traveller turned to us. </span>
      <span id="f1796">&#39;Where are the matches?&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f1797">He lit one and spoke over his pipe, puffing. </span>
      <span id="f1798">&#39;To tell you the truth ... </span>
      <span id="f1799">I hardly believe it myself.... </span>
      <span id="f1800">And yet...&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1801">His eye fell with a mute inquiry upon the withered white flowers upon the little table. </span>
      <span id="f1802">Then he turned over the hand holding his pipe, and I saw he was looking at some half-healed scars on his knuckles.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1803">The Medical Man rose, came to the lamp, and examined the flowers. </span>
      <span id="f1804">&#39;The gynaeceum&#39;s odd,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f1805">The Psychologist leant forward to see, holding out his hand for a specimen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1806">&#39;I&#39;m hanged if it isn&#39;t a quarter to one,&#39; said the Journalist. </span>
      <span id="f1807">&#39;How shall we get home?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1808">&#39;Plenty of cabs at the station,&#39; said the Psychologist.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1809">&#39;It&#39;s a curious thing,&#39; said the Medical Man; &#39;but I certainly don&#39;t know the natural order of these flowers. </span>
      <span id="f1810">May I have them?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1811">The Time Traveller hesitated. </span>
      <span id="f1812">Then suddenly: &#39;Certainly not.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1813">&#39;Where did you really get them?&#39; said the Medical Man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1814">The Time Traveller put his hand to his head. </span>
      <span id="f1815">He spoke like one who was trying to keep hold of an idea that eluded him. </span>
      <span id="f1816">&#39;They were put into my pocket by Weena, when I travelled into Time.&#39; He stared round the room. </span>
      <span id="f1817">&#39;I&#39;m damned if it isn&#39;t all going. </span>
      <span id="f1818">This room and you and the atmosphere of every day is too much for my memory. </span>
      <span id="f1819">Did I ever make a Time Machine, or a model of a Time Machine? </span>
      <span id="f1820">Or is it all only a dream? </span>
      <span id="f1821">They say life is a dream, a precious poor dream at times—but I can&#39;t stand another that won&#39;t fit. </span>
      <span id="f1822">It&#39;s madness. </span>
      <span id="f1823">And where did the dream come from? </span>
      <span id="f1824">... </span>
      <span id="f1825">I must look at that machine. </span>
      <span id="f1826">If there is one!&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1827">He caught up the lamp swiftly, and carried it, flaring red, through the door into the corridor. </span>
      <span id="f1828">We followed him. </span>
      <span id="f1829">There in the flickering light of the lamp was the machine sure enough, squat, ugly, and askew; a thing of brass, ebony, ivory, and translucent glimmering quartz. </span>
      <span id="f1830">Solid to the touch—for I put out my hand and felt the rail of it—and with brown spots and smears upon the ivory, and bits of grass and moss upon the lower parts, and one rail bent awry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1831">The Time Traveller put the lamp down on the bench, and ran his hand along the damaged rail. </span>
      <span id="f1832">&#39;It&#39;s all right now,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f1833">&#39;The story I told you was true. </span>
      <span id="f1834">I&#39;m sorry to have brought you out here in the cold.&#39; He took up the lamp, and, in an absolute silence, we returned to the smoking-room.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1835">He came into the hall with us and helped the Editor on with his coat. </span>
      <span id="f1836">The Medical Man looked into his face and, with a certain hesitation, told him he was suffering from overwork, at which he laughed hugely. </span>
      <span id="f1837">I remember him standing in the open doorway, bawling good night.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1838">I shared a cab with the Editor. </span>
      <span id="f1839">He thought the tale a &#39;gaudy lie.&#39; For my own part I was unable to come to a conclusion. </span>
      <span id="f1840">The story was so fantastic and incredible, the telling so credible and sober. </span>
      <span id="f1841">I lay awake most of the night thinking about it. </span>
      <span id="f1842">I determined to go next day and see the Time Traveller again. </span>
      <span id="f1843">I was told he was in the laboratory, and being on easy terms in the house, I went up to him. </span>
      <span id="f1844">The laboratory, however, was empty. </span>
      <span id="f1845">I stared for a minute at the Time Machine and put out my hand and touched the lever. </span>
      <span id="f1846">At that the squat substantial-looking mass swayed like a bough shaken by the wind. </span>
      <span id="f1847">Its instability startled me extremely, and I had a queer reminiscence of the childish days when I used to be forbidden to meddle. </span>
      <span id="f1848">I came back through the corridor. </span>
      <span id="f1849">The Time Traveller met me in the smoking-room. </span>
      <span id="f1850">He was coming from the house. </span>
      <span id="f1851">He had a small camera under one arm and a knapsack under the other. </span>
      <span id="f1852">He laughed when he saw me, and gave me an elbow to shake. </span>
      <span id="f1853">&#39;I&#39;m frightfully busy,&#39; said he, &#39;with that thing in there.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1854">&#39;But is it not some hoax?&#39; I said. </span>
      <span id="f1855">&#39;Do you really travel through time?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1856">&#39;Really and truly I do.&#39; And he looked frankly into my eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1857">He hesitated. </span>
      <span id="f1858">His eye wandered about the room. </span>
      <span id="f1859">&#39;I only want half an hour,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f1860">&#39;I know why you came, and it&#39;s awfully good of you. </span>
      <span id="f1861">There&#39;s some magazines here. </span>
      <span id="f1862">If you&#39;ll stop to lunch I&#39;ll prove you this time travelling up to the hilt, specimen and all. </span>
      <span id="f1863">If you&#39;ll forgive my leaving you now?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1864">I consented, hardly comprehending then the full import of his words, and he nodded and went on down the corridor. </span>
      <span id="f1865">I heard the door of the laboratory slam, seated myself in a chair, and took up a daily paper. </span>
      <span id="f1866">What was he going to do before lunch-time? </span>
      <span id="f1867">Then suddenly I was reminded by an advertisement that I had promised to meet Richardson, the publisher, at two. </span>
      <span id="f1868">I looked at my watch, and saw that I could barely save that engagement. </span>
      <span id="f1869">I got up and went down the passage to tell the Time Traveller.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1870">As I took hold of the handle of the door I heard an exclamation, oddly truncated at the end, and a click and a thud. </span>
      <span id="f1871">A gust of air whirled round me as I opened the door, and from within came the sound of broken glass falling on the floor. </span>
      <span id="f1872">The Time Traveller was not there. </span>
      <span id="f1873">I seemed to see a ghostly, indistinct figure sitting in a whirling mass of black and brass for a moment—a figure so transparent that the bench behind with its sheets of drawings was absolutely distinct; but this phantasm vanished as I rubbed my eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1874">The Time Machine had gone. </span>
      <span id="f1875">Save for a subsiding stir of dust, the further end of the laboratory was empty. </span>
      <span id="f1876">A pane of the skylight had, apparently, just been blown in.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1877">I felt an unreasonable amazement. </span>
      <span id="f1878">I knew that something strange had happened, and for the moment could not distinguish what the strange thing might be. </span>
      <span id="f1879">As I stood staring, the door into the garden opened, and the man-servant appeared.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1880">We looked at each other. </span>
      <span id="f1881">Then ideas began to come. </span>
      <span id="f1882">&#39;Has Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1883">—— gone out that way?&#39; said I.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1884">&#39;No, sir. </span>
      <span id="f1885">No one has come out this way. </span>
      <span id="f1886">I was expecting to find him here.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1887">At that I understood. </span>
      <span id="f1888">At the risk of disappointing Richardson I stayed on, waiting for the Time Traveller; waiting for the second, perhaps still stranger story, and the specimens and photographs he would bring with him. </span>
      <span id="f1889">But I am beginning now to fear that I must wait a lifetime. </span>
      <span id="f1890">The Time Traveller vanished three years ago. </span>
      <span id="f1891">And, as everybody knows now, he has never returned.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1892">EPILOGUE</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1893">One cannot choose but wonder. </span>
      <span id="f1894">Will he ever return? </span>
      <span id="f1895">It may be that he swept back into the past, and fell among the blood-drinking, hairy savages of the Age of Unpolished Stone; into the abysses of the Cretaceous Sea; or among the grotesque saurians, the huge reptilian brutes of the Jurassic times. </span>
      <span id="f1896">He may even now—if I may use the phrase—be wandering on some plesiosaurus-haunted Oolitic coral reef, or beside the lonely saline lakes of the Triassic Age. </span>
      <span id="f1897">Or did he go forward, into one of the nearer ages, in which men are still men, but with the riddles of our own time answered and its wearisome problems solved? </span>
      <span id="f1898">Into the manhood of the race: for I, for my own part, cannot think that these latter days of weak experiment, fragmentary theory, and mutual discord are indeed man&#39;s culminating time! </span>
      <span id="f1899">I say, for my own part. </span>
      <span id="f1900">He, I know—for the question had been discussed among us long before the Time Machine was made—thought but cheerlessly of the Advancement of Mankind, and saw in the growing pile of civilization only a foolish heaping that must inevitably fall back upon and destroy its makers in the end. </span>
      <span id="f1901">If that is so, it remains for us to live as though it were not so. </span>
      <span id="f1902">But to me the future is still black and blank—is a vast ignorance, lit at a few casual places by the memory of his story. </span>
      <span id="f1903">And I have by me, for my comfort, two strange white flowers—shrivelled now, and brown and flat and brittle—to witness that even when mind and strength had gone, gratitude and a mutual tenderness still lived on in the heart of man.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>