<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0011">CHAPTER I. In Which Morris Suspects</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0013">How very little does the amateur, dwelling at home at ease, comprehend the labours and perils of the author, and, when he smilingly skims the surface of a work of fiction, how little does he consider the hours of toil, consultation of authorities, researches in the Bodleian, correspondence with learned and illegible Germans--in one word, the vast scaffolding that was first built up and then knocked down, to while away an hour for him in a railway train! </span>
      <span id="f0014">Thus I might begin this tale with a biography of Tonti--birthplace, parentage, genius probably inherited from his mother, remarkable instance of precocity, etc--and a complete treatise on the system to which he bequeathed his name. </span>
      <span id="f0015">The material is all beside me in a pigeon-hole, but I scorn to appear vainglorious. </span>
      <span id="f0016">Tonti is dead, and I never saw anyone who even pretended to regret him; and, as for the tontine system, a word will suffice for all the purposes of this unvarnished narrative.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0017">A number of sprightly youths (the more the merrier) put up a certain sum of money, which is then funded in a pool under trustees; coming on for a century later, the proceeds are fluttered for a moment in the face of the last survivor, who is probably deaf, so that he cannot even hear of his success--and who is certainly dying, so that he might just as well have lost. </span>
      <span id="f0018">The peculiar poetry and even humour of the scheme is now apparent, since it is one by which nobody concerned can possibly profit; but its fine, sportsmanlike character endeared it to our grandparents.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0019">When Joseph Finsbury and his brother Masterman were little lads in white-frilled trousers, their father--a well-to-do merchant in Cheapside--caused them to join a small but rich tontine of seven-and-thirty lives. </span>
      <span id="f0020">A thousand pounds was the entrance fee; and Joseph Finsbury can remember to this day the visit to the lawyer’s, where the members of the tontine--all children like himself--were assembled together, and sat in turn in the big office chair, and signed their names with the assistance of a kind old gentleman in spectacles and Wellington boots. </span>
      <span id="f0021">He remembers playing with the children afterwards on the lawn at the back of the lawyer’s house, and a battle-royal that he had with a brother tontiner who had kicked his shins. </span>
      <span id="f0022">The sound of war called forth the lawyer from where he was dispensing cake and wine to the assembled parents in the office, and the combatants were separated, and Joseph’s spirit (for he was the smaller of the two) commended by the gentleman in the Wellington boots, who vowed he had been just such another at the same age. </span>
      <span id="f0023">Joseph wondered to himself if he had worn at that time little Wellingtons and a little bald head, and when, in bed at night, he grew tired of telling himself stories of sea-fights, he used to dress himself up as the old gentleman, and entertain other little boys and girls with cake and wine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0024">In the year 1840 the thirty-seven were all alive; in 1850 their number had decreased by six; in 1856 and 1857 business was more lively, for the Crimea and the Mutiny carried off no less than nine. </span>
      <span id="f0025">There remained in 1870 but five of the original members, and at the date of my story, including the two Finsburys, but three.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0026">By this time Masterman was in his seventy-third year; he had long complained of the effects of age, had long since retired from business, and now lived in absolute seclusion under the roof of his son Michael, the well-known solicitor. </span>
      <span id="f0027">Joseph, on the other hand, was still up and about, and still presented but a semi-venerable figure on the streets in which he loved to wander. </span>
      <span id="f0028">This was the more to be deplored because Masterman had led (even to the least particular) a model British life. </span>
      <span id="f0029">Industry, regularity, respectability, and a preference for the four per cents are understood to be the very foundations of a green old age. </span>
      <span id="f0030">All these Masterman had eminently displayed, and here he was, ab agendo, at seventy-three; while Joseph, barely two years younger, and in the most excellent preservation, had disgraced himself through life by idleness and eccentricity. </span>
      <span id="f0031">Embarked in the leather trade, he had early wearied of business, for which he was supposed to have small parts. </span>
      <span id="f0032">A taste for general information, not promptly checked, had soon begun to sap his manhood. </span>
      <span id="f0033">There is no passion more debilitating to the mind, unless, perhaps, it be that itch of public speaking which it not infrequently accompanies or begets. </span>
      <span id="f0034">The two were conjoined in the case of Joseph; the acute stage of this double malady, that in which the patient delivers gratuitous lectures, soon declared itself with severity, and not many years had passed over his head before he would have travelled thirty miles to address an infant school. </span>
      <span id="f0035">He was no student; his reading was confined to elementary textbooks and the daily papers; he did not even fly as high as cyclopedias; life, he would say, was his volume. </span>
      <span id="f0036">His lectures were not meant, he would declare, for college professors; they were addressed direct to ‘the great heart of the people’, and the heart of the people must certainly be sounder than its head, for his lucubrations were received with favour. </span>
      <span id="f0037">That entitled ‘How to Live Cheerfully on Forty Pounds a Year’, created a sensation among the unemployed. </span>
      <span id="f0038">‘Education: Its Aims, Objects, Purposes, and Desirability’, gained him the respect of the shallow-minded. </span>
      <span id="f0039">As for his celebrated essay on ‘Life Insurance Regarded in its Relation to the Masses’, read before the Working Men’s Mutual Improvement Society, Isle of Dogs, it was received with a ‘literal ovation’ by an unintelligent audience of both sexes, and so marked was the effect that he was next year elected honorary president of the institution, an office of less than no emolument--since the holder was expected to come down with a donation--but one which highly satisfied his self-esteem.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0040">While Joseph was thus building himself up a reputation among the more cultivated portion of the ignorant, his domestic life was suddenly overwhelmed by orphans. </span>
      <span id="f0041">The death of his younger brother Jacob saddled him with the charge of two boys, Morris and John; and in the course of the same year his family was still further swelled by the addition of a little girl, the daughter of John Henry Hazeltine, Esq., a gentleman of small property and fewer friends. </span>
      <span id="f0042">He had met Joseph only once, at a lecture-hall in Holloway; but from that formative experience he returned home to make a new will, and consign his daughter and her fortune to the lecturer. </span>
      <span id="f0043">Joseph had a kindly disposition; and yet it was not without reluctance that he accepted this new responsibility, advertised for a nurse, and purchased a second-hand perambulator. </span>
      <span id="f0044">Morris and John he made more readily welcome; not so much because of the tie of consanguinity as because the leather business (in which he hastened to invest their fortune of thirty thousand pounds) had recently exhibited inexplicable symptoms of decline. </span>
      <span id="f0045">A young but capable Scot was chosen as manager to the enterprise, and the cares of business never again afflicted Joseph Finsbury. </span>
      <span id="f0046">Leaving his charges in the hands of the capable Scot (who was married), he began his extensive travels on the Continent and in Asia Minor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0047">With a polyglot Testament in one hand and a phrase-book in the other, he groped his way among the speakers of eleven European languages. </span>
      <span id="f0048">The first of these guides is hardly applicable to the purposes of the philosophic traveller, and even the second is designed more expressly for the tourist than for the expert in life. </span>
      <span id="f0049">But he pressed interpreters into his service--whenever he could get their services for nothing--and by one means and another filled many notebooks with the results of his researches.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0050">In these wanderings he spent several years, and only returned to England when the increasing age of his charges needed his attention. </span>
      <span id="f0051">The two lads had been placed in a good but economical school, where they had received a sound commercial education; which was somewhat awkward, as the leather business was by no means in a state to court enquiry. </span>
      <span id="f0052">In fact, when Joseph went over his accounts preparatory to surrendering his trust, he was dismayed to discover that his brother’s fortune had not increased by his stewardship; even by making over to his two wards every penny he had in the world, there would still be a deficit of seven thousand eight hundred pounds. </span>
      <span id="f0053">When these facts were communicated to the two brothers in the presence of a lawyer, Morris Finsbury threatened his uncle with all the terrors of the law, and was only prevented from taking extreme steps by the advice of the professional man. </span>
      <span id="f0054">‘You cannot get blood from a stone,’ observed the lawyer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0055">And Morris saw the point and came to terms with his uncle. </span>
      <span id="f0056">On the one side, Joseph gave up all that he possessed, and assigned to his nephew his contingent interest in the tontine, already quite a hopeful speculation. </span>
      <span id="f0057">On the other, Morris agreed to harbour his uncle and Miss Hazeltine (who had come to grief with the rest), and to pay to each of them one pound a month as pocket-money. </span>
      <span id="f0058">The allowance was amply sufficient for the old man; it scarce appears how Miss Hazeltine contrived to dress upon it; but she did, and, what is more, she never complained. </span>
      <span id="f0059">She was, indeed, sincerely attached to her incompetent guardian. </span>
      <span id="f0060">He had never been unkind; his age spoke for him loudly; there was something appealing in his whole-souled quest of knowledge and innocent delight in the smallest mark of admiration; and, though the lawyer had warned her she was being sacrificed, Julia had refused to add to the perplexities of Uncle Joseph.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0061">In a large, dreary house in John Street, Bloomsbury, these four dwelt together; a family in appearance, in reality a financial association. </span>
      <span id="f0062">Julia and Uncle Joseph were, of course, slaves; John, a gentle man with a taste for the banjo, the music-hall, the Gaiety bar, and the sporting papers, must have been anywhere a secondary figure; and the cares and delights of empire devolved entirely upon Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0063">That these are inextricably intermixed is one of the commonplaces with which the bland essayist consoles the incompetent and the obscure, but in the case of Morris the bitter must have largely outweighed the sweet. </span>
      <span id="f0064">He grudged no trouble to himself, he spared none to others; he called the servants in the morning, he served out the stores with his own hand, he took soundings of the sherry, he numbered the remainder biscuits; painful scenes took place over the weekly bills, and the cook was frequently impeached, and the tradespeople came and hectored with him in the back parlour upon a question of three farthings. </span>
      <span id="f0065">The superficial might have deemed him a miser; in his own eyes he was simply a man who had been defrauded; the world owed him seven thousand eight hundred pounds, and he intended that the world should pay.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0066">But it was in his dealings with Joseph that Morris’s character particularly shone. </span>
      <span id="f0067">His uncle was a rather gambling stock in which he had invested heavily; and he spared no pains in nursing the security. </span>
      <span id="f0068">The old man was seen monthly by a physician, whether he was well or ill. </span>
      <span id="f0069">His diet, his raiment, his occasional outings, now to Brighton, now to Bournemouth, were doled out to him like pap to infants. </span>
      <span id="f0070">In bad weather he must keep the house. </span>
      <span id="f0071">In good weather, by half-past nine, he must be ready in the hall; Morris would see that he had gloves and that his shoes were sound; and the pair would start for the leather business arm in arm. </span>
      <span id="f0072">The way there was probably dreary enough, for there was no pretence of friendly feeling; Morris had never ceased to upbraid his guardian with his defalcation and to lament the burthen of Miss Hazeltine; and Joseph, though he was a mild enough soul, regarded his nephew with something very near akin to hatred. </span>
      <span id="f0073">But the way there was nothing to the journey back; for the mere sight of the place of business, as well as every detail of its transactions, was enough to poison life for any Finsbury.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0074">Joseph’s name was still over the door; it was he who still signed the cheques; but this was only policy on the part of Morris, and designed to discourage other members of the tontine. </span>
      <span id="f0075">In reality the business was entirely his; and he found it an inheritance of sorrows. </span>
      <span id="f0076">He tried to sell it, and the offers he received were quite derisory. </span>
      <span id="f0077">He tried to extend it, and it was only the liabilities he succeeded in extending; to restrict it, and it was only the profits he managed to restrict. </span>
      <span id="f0078">Nobody had ever made money out of that concern except the capable Scot, who retired (after his discharge) to the neighbourhood of Banff and built a castle with his profits. </span>
      <span id="f0079">The memory of this fallacious Caledonian Morris would revile daily, as he sat in the private office opening his mail, with old Joseph at another table, sullenly awaiting orders, or savagely affixing signatures to he knew not what. </span>
      <span id="f0080">And when the man of the heather pushed cynicism so far as to send him the announcement of his second marriage (to Davida, eldest daughter of the Revd. </span>
      <span id="f0081">Alexander McCraw), it was really supposed that Morris would have had a fit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0082">Business hours, in the Finsbury leather trade, had been cut to the quick; even Morris’s strong sense of duty to himself was not strong enough to dally within those walls and under the shadow of that bankruptcy; and presently the manager and the clerks would draw a long breath, and compose themselves for another day of procrastination. </span>
      <span id="f0083">Raw Haste, on the authority of my Lord Tennyson, is half-sister to Delay; but the Business Habits are certainly her uncles. </span>
      <span id="f0084">Meanwhile, the leather merchant would lead his living investment back to John Street like a puppy dog; and, having there immured him in the hall, would depart for the day on the quest of seal rings, the only passion of his life. </span>
      <span id="f0085">Joseph had more than the vanity of man, he had that of lecturers. </span>
      <span id="f0086">He owned he was in fault, although more sinned against (by the capable Scot) than sinning; but had he steeped his hands in gore, he would still not deserve to be thus dragged at the chariot-wheels of a young man, to sit a captive in the halls of his own leather business, to be entertained with mortifying comments on his whole career--to have his costume examined, his collar pulled up, the presence of his mittens verified, and to be taken out and brought home in custody, like an infant with a nurse. </span>
      <span id="f0087">At the thought of it his soul would swell with venom, and he would make haste to hang up his hat and coat and the detested mittens, and slink upstairs to Julia and his notebooks. </span>
      <span id="f0088">The drawing-room at least was sacred from Morris; it belonged to the old man and the young girl; it was there that she made her dresses; it was there that he inked his spectacles over the registration of disconnected facts and the calculation of insignificant statistics.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0089">Here he would sometimes lament his connection with the tontine. </span>
      <span id="f0090">‘If it were not for that,’ he cried one afternoon, ‘he would not care to keep me. </span>
      <span id="f0091">I might be a free man, Julia. </span>
      <span id="f0092">And I could so easily support myself by giving lectures.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0093">‘To be sure you could,’ said she; ‘and I think it one of the meanest things he ever did to deprive you of that amusement. </span>
      <span id="f0094">There were those nice people at the Isle of Cats (wasn’t it?) who wrote and asked you so very kindly to give them an address. </span>
      <span id="f0095">I did think he might have let you go to the Isle of Cats.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0096">‘He is a man of no intelligence,’ cried Joseph. </span>
      <span id="f0097">‘He lives here literally surrounded by the absorbing spectacle of life, and for all the good it does him, he might just as well be in his coffin. </span>
      <span id="f0098">Think of his opportunities! </span>
      <span id="f0099">The heart of any other young man would burn within him at the chance. </span>
      <span id="f0100">The amount of information that I have it in my power to convey, if he would only listen, is a thing that beggars language, Julia.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0101">‘Whatever you do, my dear, you mustn’t excite yourself,’ said Julia; ‘for you know, if you look at all ill, the doctor will be sent for.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0102">‘That is very true,’ returned the old man humbly, ‘I will compose myself with a little study.’ He thumbed his gallery of notebooks. </span>
      <span id="f0103">‘I wonder,’ he said, ‘I wonder (since I see your hands are occupied) whether it might not interest you--’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0104">‘Why, of course it would,’ cried Julia. </span>
      <span id="f0105">‘Read me one of your nice stories, there’s a dear.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0106">He had the volume down and his spectacles upon his nose instanter, as though to forestall some possible retractation. </span>
      <span id="f0107">‘What I propose to read to you,’ said he, skimming through the pages, ‘is the notes of a highly important conversation with a Dutch courier of the name of David Abbas, which is the Latin for abbot. </span>
      <span id="f0108">Its results are well worth the money it cost me, for, as Abbas at first appeared somewhat impatient, I was induced to (what is, I believe, singularly called) stand him drink. </span>
      <span id="f0109">It runs only to about five-and-twenty pages. </span>
      <span id="f0110">Yes, here it is.’ He cleared his throat, and began to read.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0111">Mr Finsbury (according to his own report) contributed about four hundred and ninety-nine five-hundredths of the interview, and elicited from Abbas literally nothing. </span>
      <span id="f0112">It was dull for Julia, who did not require to listen; for the Dutch courier, who had to answer, it must have been a perfect nightmare. </span>
      <span id="f0113">It would seem as if he had consoled himself by frequent appliances to the bottle; it would even seem that (toward the end) he had ceased to depend on Joseph’s frugal generosity and called for the flagon on his own account. </span>
      <span id="f0114">The effect, at least, of some mellowing influence was visible in the record: Abbas became suddenly a willing witness; he began to volunteer disclosures; and Julia had just looked up from her seam with something like a smile, when Morris burst into the house, eagerly calling for his uncle, and the next instant plunged into the room, waving in the air the evening paper.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0115">It was indeed with great news that he came charged. </span>
      <span id="f0116">The demise was announced of Lieutenant-General Sir Glasgow Biggar, KCSI, KCMG, etc., and the prize of the tontine now lay between the Finsbury brothers. </span>
      <span id="f0117">Here was Morris’s opportunity at last. </span>
      <span id="f0118">The brothers had never, it is true, been cordial. </span>
      <span id="f0119">When word came that Joseph was in Asia Minor, Masterman had expressed himself with irritation. </span>
      <span id="f0120">‘I call it simply indecent,’ he had said. </span>
      <span id="f0121">‘Mark my words--we shall hear of him next at the North Pole.’ And these bitter expressions had been reported to the traveller on his return. </span>
      <span id="f0122">What was worse, Masterman had refused to attend the lecture on ‘Education: Its Aims, Objects, Purposes, and Desirability’, although invited to the platform. </span>
      <span id="f0123">Since then the brothers had not met. </span>
      <span id="f0124">On the other hand, they never had openly quarrelled; Joseph (by Morris’s orders) was prepared to waive the advantage of his juniority; Masterman had enjoyed all through life the reputation of a man neither greedy nor unfair. </span>
      <span id="f0125">Here, then, were all the elements of compromise assembled; and Morris, suddenly beholding his seven thousand eight hundred pounds restored to him, and himself dismissed from the vicissitudes of the leather trade, hastened the next morning to the office of his cousin Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0126">Michael was something of a public character. </span>
      <span id="f0127">Launched upon the law at a very early age, and quite without protectors, he had become a trafficker in shady affairs. </span>
      <span id="f0128">He was known to be the man for a lost cause; it was known he could extract testimony from a stone, and interest from a gold-mine; and his office was besieged in consequence by all that numerous class of persons who have still some reputation to lose, and find themselves upon the point of losing it; by those who have made undesirable acquaintances, who have mislaid a compromising correspondence, or who are blackmailed by their own butlers. </span>
      <span id="f0129">In private life Michael was a man of pleasure; but it was thought his dire experience at the office had gone far to sober him, and it was known that (in the matter of investments) he preferred the solid to the brilliant. </span>
      <span id="f0130">What was yet more to the purpose, he had been all his life a consistent scoffer at the Finsbury tontine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0131">It was therefore with little fear for the result that Morris presented himself before his cousin, and proceeded feverishly to set forth his scheme. </span>
      <span id="f0132">For near upon a quarter of an hour the lawyer suffered him to dwell upon its manifest advantages uninterrupted. </span>
      <span id="f0133">Then Michael rose from his seat, and, ringing for his clerk, uttered a single clause: ‘It won’t do, Morris.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0134">It was in vain that the leather merchant pleaded and reasoned, and returned day after day to plead and reason. </span>
      <span id="f0135">It was in vain that he offered a bonus of one thousand, of two thousand, of three thousand pounds; in vain that he offered, in Joseph’s name, to be content with only one-third of the pool. </span>
      <span id="f0136">Still there came the same answer: ‘It won’t do.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0137">‘I can’t see the bottom of this,’ he said at last. </span>
      <span id="f0138">‘You answer none of my arguments; you haven’t a word to say. </span>
      <span id="f0139">For my part, I believe it’s malice.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0140">The lawyer smiled at him benignly. </span>
      <span id="f0141">‘You may believe one thing,’ said he. </span>
      <span id="f0142">‘Whatever else I do, I am not going to gratify any of your curiosity. </span>
      <span id="f0143">You see I am a trifle more communicative today, because this is our last interview upon the subject.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0144">‘Our last interview!’ cried Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0145">‘The stirrup-cup, dear boy,’ returned Michael. </span>
      <span id="f0146">‘I can’t have my business hours encroached upon. </span>
      <span id="f0147">And, by the by, have you no business of your own? </span>
      <span id="f0148">Are there no convulsions in the leather trade?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0149">‘I believe it to be malice,’ repeated Morris doggedly. </span>
      <span id="f0150">‘You always hated and despised me from a boy.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0151">‘No, no--not hated,’ returned Michael soothingly. </span>
      <span id="f0152">‘I rather like you than otherwise; there’s such a permanent surprise about you, you look so dark and attractive from a distance. </span>
      <span id="f0153">Do you know that to the naked eye you look romantic?--like what they call a man with a history? </span>
      <span id="f0154">And indeed, from all that I can hear, the history of the leather trade is full of incident.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0155">‘Yes,’ said Morris, disregarding these remarks, ‘it’s no use coming here. </span>
      <span id="f0156">I shall see your father.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0157">‘O no, you won’t,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f0158">‘Nobody shall see my father.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0159">‘I should like to know why,’ cried his cousin.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0160">‘I never make any secret of that,’ replied the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f0161">‘He is too ill.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0162">‘If he is as ill as you say,’ cried the other, ‘the more reason for accepting my proposal. </span>
      <span id="f0163">I will see him.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0164">‘Will you?’ said Michael, and he rose and rang for his clerk.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0165">It was now time, according to Sir Faraday Bond, the medical baronet whose name is so familiar at the foot of bulletins, that Joseph (the poor Golden Goose) should be removed into the purer air of Bournemouth; and for that uncharted wilderness of villas the family now shook off the dust of Bloomsbury; Julia delighted, because at Bournemouth she sometimes made acquaintances; John in despair, for he was a man of city tastes; Joseph indifferent where he was, so long as there was pen and ink and daily papers, and he could avoid martyrdom at the office; Morris himself, perhaps, not displeased to pretermit these visits to the city, and have a quiet time for thought. </span>
      <span id="f0166">He was prepared for any sacrifice; all he desired was to get his money again and clear his feet of leather; and it would be strange, since he was so modest in his desires, and the pool amounted to upward of a hundred and sixteen thousand pounds--it would be strange indeed if he could find no way of influencing Michael. </span>
      <span id="f0167">‘If I could only guess his reason,’ he repeated to himself; and by day, as he walked in Branksome Woods, and by night, as he turned upon his bed, and at meal-times, when he forgot to eat, and in the bathing machine, when he forgot to dress himself, that problem was constantly before him: Why had Michael refused?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0168">At last, one night, he burst into his brother’s room and woke him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0169">‘What’s all this?’ asked John.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0170">‘Julia leaves this place tomorrow,’ replied Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0171">‘She must go up to town and get the house ready, and find servants. </span>
      <span id="f0172">We shall all follow in three days.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0173">‘Oh, brayvo!’ cried John. </span>
      <span id="f0174">‘But why?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0175">‘I’ve found it out, John,’ returned his brother gently.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0176">‘It? </span>
      <span id="f0177">What?’ enquired John.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0178">‘Why Michael won’t compromise,’ said Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0179">‘It’s because he can’t. </span>
      <span id="f0180">It’s because Masterman’s dead, and he’s keeping it dark.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0181">‘Golly!’ cried the impressionable John. </span>
      <span id="f0182">‘But what’s the use? </span>
      <span id="f0183">Why does he do it, anyway?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0184">‘To defraud us of the tontine,’ said his brother.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0185">‘He couldn’t; you have to have a doctor’s certificate,’ objected John.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0186">‘Did you never hear of venal doctors?’ enquired Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0187">‘They’re as common as blackberries: you can pick ‘em up for three-pound-ten a head.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0188">‘I wouldn’t do it under fifty if I were a sawbones,’ ejaculated John.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0189">‘And then Michael,’ continued Morris, ‘is in the very thick of it. </span>
      <span id="f0190">All his clients have come to grief; his whole business is rotten eggs. </span>
      <span id="f0191">If any man could arrange it, he could; and depend upon it, he has his plan all straight; and depend upon it, it’s a good one, for he’s clever, and be damned to him! </span>
      <span id="f0192">But I’m clever too; and I’m desperate. </span>
      <span id="f0193">I lost seven thousand eight hundred pounds when I was an orphan at school.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0194">‘O, don’t be tedious,’ interrupted John. </span>
      <span id="f0195">‘You’ve lost far more already trying to get it back.’</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>