<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER II. In Which Morris takes Action</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0196">CHAPTER II. In Which Morris takes Action</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0198">Some days later, accordingly, the three males of this depressing family might have been observed (by a reader of G. </span>
      <span id="f0199">P. </span>
      <span id="f0200">R. </span>
      <span id="f0201">James) taking their departure from the East Station of Bournemouth. </span>
      <span id="f0202">The weather was raw and changeable, and Joseph was arrayed in consequence according to the principles of Sir Faraday Bond, a man no less strict (as is well known) on costume than on diet. </span>
      <span id="f0203">There are few polite invalids who have not lived, or tried to live, by that punctilious physician’s orders. </span>
      <span id="f0204">‘Avoid tea, madam,’ the reader has doubtless heard him say, ‘avoid tea, fried liver, antimonial wine, and bakers’ bread. </span>
      <span id="f0205">Retire nightly at 10.45; and clothe yourself (if you please) throughout in hygienic flannel. </span>
      <span id="f0206">Externally, the fur of the marten is indicated. </span>
      <span id="f0207">Do not forget to procure a pair of health boots at Messrs Dail and Crumbie’s.’ And he has probably called you back, even after you have paid your fee, to add with stentorian emphasis: ‘I had forgotten one caution: avoid kippered sturgeon as you would the very devil.’ The unfortunate Joseph was cut to the pattern of Sir Faraday in every button; he was shod with the health boot; his suit was of genuine ventilating cloth; his shirt of hygienic flannel, a somewhat dingy fabric; and he was draped to the knees in the inevitable greatcoat of marten’s fur. </span>
      <span id="f0208">The very railway porters at Bournemouth (which was a favourite station of the doctor’s) marked the old gentleman for a creature of Sir Faraday. </span>
      <span id="f0209">There was but one evidence of personal taste, a vizarded forage cap; from this form of headpiece, since he had fled from a dying jackal on the plains of Ephesus, and weathered a bora in the Adriatic, nothing could divorce our traveller.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0210">The three Finsburys mounted into their compartment, and fell immediately to quarrelling, a step unseemly in itself and (in this case) highly unfortunate for Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0211">Had he lingered a moment longer by the window, this tale need never have been written. </span>
      <span id="f0212">For he might then have observed (as the porters did not fail to do) the arrival of a second passenger in the uniform of Sir Faraday Bond. </span>
      <span id="f0213">But he had other matters on hand, which he judged (God knows how erroneously) to be more important.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0214">‘I never heard of such a thing,’ he cried, resuming a discussion which had scarcely ceased all morning. </span>
      <span id="f0215">‘The bill is not yours; it is mine.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0216">‘It is payable to me,’ returned the old gentleman, with an air of bitter obstinacy. </span>
      <span id="f0217">‘I will do what I please with my own property.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0218">The bill was one for eight hundred pounds, which had been given him at breakfast to endorse, and which he had simply pocketed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0219">‘Hear him, Johnny!’ cried Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0220">‘His property! </span>
      <span id="f0221">the very clothes upon his back belong to me.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0222">‘Let him alone,’ said John. </span>
      <span id="f0223">‘I am sick of both of you.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0224">‘That is no way to speak of your uncle, sir,’ cried Joseph. </span>
      <span id="f0225">‘I will not endure this disrespect. </span>
      <span id="f0226">You are a pair of exceedingly forward, impudent, and ignorant young men, and I have quite made up my mind to put an end to the whole business.’.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0227">‘O skittles!’ said the graceful John.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0228">But Morris was not so easy in his mind. </span>
      <span id="f0229">This unusual act of insubordination had already troubled him; and these mutinous words now sounded ominously in his ears. </span>
      <span id="f0230">He looked at the old gentleman uneasily. </span>
      <span id="f0231">Upon one occasion, many years before, when Joseph was delivering a lecture, the audience had revolted in a body; finding their entertainer somewhat dry, they had taken the question of amusement into their own hands; and the lecturer (along with the board schoolmaster, the Baptist clergyman, and a working-man’s candidate, who made up his bodyguard) was ultimately driven from the scene. </span>
      <span id="f0232">Morris had not been present on that fatal day; if he had, he would have recognized a certain fighting glitter in his uncle’s eye, and a certain chewing movement of his lips, as old acquaintances. </span>
      <span id="f0233">But even to the inexpert these symptoms breathed of something dangerous.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0234">‘Well, well,’ said Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0235">‘I have no wish to bother you further till we get to London.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0236">Joseph did not so much as look at him in answer; with tremulous hands he produced a copy of the British Mechanic, and ostentatiously buried himself in its perusal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0237">‘I wonder what can make him so cantankerous?’ reflected the nephew. </span>
      <span id="f0238">‘I don’t like the look of it at all.’ And he dubiously scratched his nose.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0239">The train travelled forth into the world, bearing along with it the customary freight of obliterated voyagers, and along with these old Joseph, affecting immersion in his paper, and John slumbering over the columns of the Pink Un, and Morris revolving in his mind a dozen grudges, and suspicions, and alarms. </span>
      <span id="f0240">It passed Christchurch by the sea, Herne with its pinewoods, Ringwood on its mazy river. </span>
      <span id="f0241">A little behind time, but not much for the South-Western, it drew up at the platform of a station, in the midst of the New Forest, the real name of which (in case the railway company ‘might have the law of me’) I shall veil under the alias of Browndean.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0242">Many passengers put their heads to the window, and among the rest an old gentleman on whom I willingly dwell, for I am nearly done with him now, and (in the whole course of the present narrative) I am not in the least likely to meet another character so decent. </span>
      <span id="f0243">His name is immaterial, not so his habits. </span>
      <span id="f0244">He had passed his life wandering in a tweed suit on the continent of Europe; and years of Galignani’s Messenger having at length undermined his eyesight, he suddenly remembered the rivers of Assyria and came to London to consult an oculist. </span>
      <span id="f0245">From the oculist to the dentist, and from both to the physician, the step appears inevitable; presently he was in the hands of Sir Faraday, robed in ventilating cloth and sent to Bournemouth; and to that domineering baronet (who was his only friend upon his native soil) he was now returning to report. </span>
      <span id="f0246">The case of these tweedsuited wanderers is unique. </span>
      <span id="f0247">We have all seen them entering the table d’hote (at Spezzia, or Grdtz, or Venice) with a genteel melancholy and a faint appearance of having been to India and not succeeded. </span>
      <span id="f0248">In the offices of many hundred hotels they are known by name; and yet, if the whole of this wandering cohort were to disappear tomorrow, their absence would be wholly unremarked. </span>
      <span id="f0249">How much more, if only one--say this one in the ventilating cloth--should vanish! </span>
      <span id="f0250">He had paid his bills at Bournemouth; his worldly effects were all in the van in two portmanteaux, and these after the proper interval would be sold as unclaimed baggage to a Jew; Sir Faraday’s butler would be a half-crown poorer at the year’s end, and the hotelkeepers of Europe about the same date would be mourning a small but quite observable decline in profits. </span>
      <span id="f0251">And that would be literally all. </span>
      <span id="f0252">Perhaps the old gentleman thought something of the sort, for he looked melancholy enough as he pulled his bare, grey head back into the carriage, and the train smoked under the bridge, and forth, with ever quickening speed, across the mingled heaths and woods of the New Forest.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0253">Not many hundred yards beyond Browndean, however, a sudden jarring of brakes set everybody’s teeth on edge, and there was a brutal stoppage. </span>
      <span id="f0254">Morris Finsbury was aware of a confused uproar of voices, and sprang to the window. </span>
      <span id="f0255">Women were screaming, men were tumbling from the windows on the track, the guard was crying to them to stay where they were; at the same time the train began to gather way and move very slowly backward toward Browndean; and the next moment--, all these various sounds were blotted out in the apocalyptic whistle and the thundering onslaught of the down express.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0256">The actual collision Morris did not hear. </span>
      <span id="f0257">Perhaps he fainted. </span>
      <span id="f0258">He had a wild dream of having seen the carriage double up and fall to pieces like a pantomime trick; and sure enough, when he came to himself, he was lying on the bare earth and under the open sky. </span>
      <span id="f0259">His head ached savagely; he carried his hand to his brow, and was not surprised to see it red with blood. </span>
      <span id="f0260">The air was filled with an intolerable, throbbing roar, which he expected to find die away with the return of consciousness; and instead of that it seemed but to swell the louder and to pierce the more cruelly through his ears. </span>
      <span id="f0261">It was a raging, bellowing thunder, like a boiler-riveting factory.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0262">And now curiosity began to stir, and he sat up and looked about him. </span>
      <span id="f0263">The track at this point ran in a sharp curve about a wooded hillock; all of the near side was heaped with the wreckage of the Bournemouth train; that of the express was mostly hidden by the trees; and just at the turn, under clouds of vomiting steam and piled about with cairns of living coal, lay what remained of the two engines, one upon the other. </span>
      <span id="f0264">On the heathy margin of the line were many people running to and fro, and crying aloud as they ran, and many others lying motionless like sleeping tramps.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0265">Morris suddenly drew an inference. </span>
      <span id="f0266">‘There has been an accident’ thought he, and was elated at his perspicacity. </span>
      <span id="f0267">Almost at the same time his eye lighted on John, who lay close by as white as paper. </span>
      <span id="f0268">‘Poor old John! </span>
      <span id="f0269">poor old cove!’ he thought, the schoolboy expression popping forth from some forgotten treasury, and he took his brother’s hand in his with childish tenderness. </span>
      <span id="f0270">It was perhaps the touch that recalled him; at least John opened his eyes, sat suddenly up, and after several ineffectual movements of his lips, ‘What’s the row?’ said he, in a phantom voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0271">The din of that devil’s smithy still thundered in their ears. </span>
      <span id="f0272">‘Let us get away from that,’ Morris cried, and pointed to the vomit of steam that still spouted from the broken engines. </span>
      <span id="f0273">And the pair helped each other up, and stood and quaked and wavered and stared about them at the scene of death.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0274">Just then they were approached by a party of men who had already organized themselves for the purposes of rescue.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0275">‘Are you hurt?’ cried one of these, a young fellow with the sweat streaming down his pallid face, and who, by the way he was treated, was evidently the doctor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0276">Morris shook his head, and the young man, nodding grimly, handed him a bottle of some spirit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0277">‘Take a drink of that,’ he said; ‘your friend looks as if he needed it badly. </span>
      <span id="f0278">We want every man we can get,’ he added; ‘there’s terrible work before us, and nobody should shirk. </span>
      <span id="f0279">If you can do no more, you can carry a stretcher.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0280">The doctor was hardly gone before Morris, under the spur of the dram, awoke to the full possession of his wits.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0281">‘My God!’ he cried. </span>
      <span id="f0282">‘Uncle Joseph!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0283">‘Yes,’ said John, ‘where can he be? </span>
      <span id="f0284">He can’t be far off. </span>
      <span id="f0285">I hope the old party isn’t damaged.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0286">‘Come and help me to look,’ said Morris, with a snap of savage determination strangely foreign to his ordinary bearing; and then, for one moment, he broke forth. </span>
      <span id="f0287">‘If he’s dead!’ he cried, and shook his fist at heaven.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0288">To and fro the brothers hurried, staring in the faces of the wounded, or turning the dead upon their backs. </span>
      <span id="f0289">They must have thus examined forty people, and still there was no word of Uncle Joseph. </span>
      <span id="f0290">But now the course of their search brought them near the centre of the collision, where the boilers were still blowing off steam with a deafening clamour. </span>
      <span id="f0291">It was a part of the field not yet gleaned by the rescuing party. </span>
      <span id="f0292">The ground, especially on the margin of the wood, was full of inequalities--here a pit, there a hillock surmounted with a bush of furze. </span>
      <span id="f0293">It was a place where many bodies might lie concealed, and they beat it like pointers after game. </span>
      <span id="f0294">Suddenly Morris, who was leading, paused and reached forth his index with a tragic gesture. </span>
      <span id="f0295">John followed the direction of his brother’s hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0296">In the bottom of a sandy hole lay something that had once been human. </span>
      <span id="f0297">The face had suffered severely, and it was unrecognizable; but that was not required. </span>
      <span id="f0298">The snowy hair, the coat of marten, the ventilating cloth, the hygienic flannel--everything down to the health boots from Messrs Dail and Crumbie’s, identified the body as that of Uncle Joseph. </span>
      <span id="f0299">Only the forage cap must have been lost in the convulsion, for the dead man was bareheaded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0300">‘The poor old beggar!’ said John, with a touch of natural feeling; ‘I would give ten pounds if we hadn’t chivvied him in the train!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0301">But there was no sentiment in the face of Morris as he gazed upon the dead. </span>
      <span id="f0302">Gnawing his nails, with introverted eyes, his brow marked with the stamp of tragic indignation and tragic intellectual effort, he stood there silent. </span>
      <span id="f0303">Here was a last injustice; he had been robbed while he was an orphan at school, he had been lashed to a decadent leather business, he had been saddled with Miss Hazeltine, his cousin had been defrauding him of the tontine, and he had borne all this, we might almost say, with dignity, and now they had gone and killed his uncle!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0304">‘Here!’ he said suddenly, ‘take his heels, we must get him into the woods. </span>
      <span id="f0305">I’m not going to have anybody find this.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0306">‘O, fudge!’ said John, ‘where’s the use?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0307">‘Do what I tell you,’ spirted Morris, as he took the corpse by the shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f0308">‘Am I to carry him myself?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0309">They were close upon the borders of the wood; in ten or twelve paces they were under cover; and a little further back, in a sandy clearing of the trees, they laid their burthen down, and stood and looked at it with loathing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0310">‘What do you mean to do?’ whispered John.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0311">‘Bury him, to be sure,’ responded Morris, and he opened his pocket-knife and began feverishly to dig.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0312">‘You’ll never make a hand of it with that,’ objected the other.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0313">‘If you won’t help me, you cowardly shirk,’ screamed Morris, ‘you can go to the devil!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0314">‘It’s the childishest folly,’ said John; ‘but no man shall call me a coward,’ and he began to help his brother grudgingly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0315">The soil was sandy and light, but matted with the roots of the surrounding firs. </span>
      <span id="f0316">Gorse tore their hands; and as they baled the sand from the grave, it was often discoloured with their blood. </span>
      <span id="f0317">An hour passed of unremitting energy upon the part of Morris, of lukewarm help on that of John; and still the trench was barely nine inches in depth. </span>
      <span id="f0318">Into this the body was rudely flung: sand was piled upon it, and then more sand must be dug, and gorse had to be cut to pile on that; and still from one end of the sordid mound a pair of feet projected and caught the light upon their patent-leather toes. </span>
      <span id="f0319">But by this time the nerves of both were shaken; even Morris had enough of his grisly task; and they skulked off like animals into the thickest of the neighbouring covert.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0320">‘It’s the best that we can do,’ said Morris, sitting down.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0321">‘And now,’ said John, ‘perhaps you’ll have the politeness to tell me what it’s all about.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0322">‘Upon my word,’ cried Morris, ‘if you do not understand for yourself, I almost despair of telling you.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0323">‘O, of course it’s some rot about the tontine,’ returned the other. </span>
      <span id="f0324">‘But it’s the merest nonsense. </span>
      <span id="f0325">We’ve lost it, and there’s an end.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0326">‘I tell you,’ said Morris, ‘Uncle Masterman is dead. </span>
      <span id="f0327">I know it, there’s a voice that tells me so.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0328">‘Well, and so is Uncle Joseph,’ said John.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0329">‘He’s not dead, unless I choose,’ returned Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0330">‘And come to that,’ cried John, ‘if you’re right, and Uncle Masterman’s been dead ever so long, all we have to do is to tell the truth and expose Michael.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0331">‘You seem to think Michael is a fool,’ sneered Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0332">‘Can’t you understand he’s been preparing this fraud for years? </span>
      <span id="f0333">He has the whole thing ready: the nurse, the doctor, the undertaker, all bought, the certificate all ready but the date! </span>
      <span id="f0334">Let him get wind of this business, and you mark my words, Uncle Masterman will die in two days and be buried in a week. </span>
      <span id="f0335">But see here, Johnny; what Michael can do, I can do. </span>
      <span id="f0336">If he plays a game of bluff, so can I. </span>
      <span id="f0337">If his father is to live for ever, by God, so shall my uncle!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0338">‘It’s illegal, ain’t it?’ said John.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0339">‘A man must have SOME moral courage,’ replied Morris with dignity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0340">‘And then suppose you’re wrong? </span>
      <span id="f0341">Suppose Uncle Masterman’s alive and kicking?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0342">‘Well, even then,’ responded the plotter, ‘we are no worse off than we were before; in fact, we’re better. </span>
      <span id="f0343">Uncle Masterman must die some day; as long as Uncle Joseph was alive, he might have died any day; but we’re out of all that trouble now: there’s no sort of limit to the game that I propose--it can be kept up till Kingdom Come.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0344">‘If I could only see how you meant to set about it’ sighed John. </span>
      <span id="f0345">‘But you know, Morris, you always were such a bungler.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0346">‘I’d like to know what I ever bungled,’ cried Morris; ‘I have the best collection of signet rings in London.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0347">‘Well, you know, there’s the leather business,’ suggested the other. </span>
      <span id="f0348">‘That’s considered rather a hash.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0349">It was a mark of singular self-control in Morris that he suffered this to pass unchallenged, and even unresented.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0350">‘About the business in hand,’ said he, ‘once we can get him up to Bloomsbury, there’s no sort of trouble. </span>
      <span id="f0351">We bury him in the cellar, which seems made for it; and then all I have to do is to start out and find a venal doctor.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0352">‘Why can’t we leave him where he is?’ asked John.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0353">‘Because we know nothing about the country,’ retorted Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0354">‘This wood may be a regular lovers’ walk. </span>
      <span id="f0355">Turn your mind to the real difficulty. </span>
      <span id="f0356">How are we to get him up to Bloomsbury?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0357">Various schemes were mooted and rejected. </span>
      <span id="f0358">The railway station at Browndean was, of course, out of the question, for it would now be a centre of curiosity and gossip, and (of all things) they would be least able to dispatch a dead body without remark. </span>
      <span id="f0359">John feebly proposed getting an ale-cask and sending it as beer, but the objections to this course were so overwhelming that Morris scorned to answer. </span>
      <span id="f0360">The purchase of a packing-case seemed equally hopeless, for why should two gentlemen without baggage of any kind require a packing-case? </span>
      <span id="f0361">They would be more likely to require clean linen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0362">‘We are working on wrong lines,’ cried Morris at last. </span>
      <span id="f0363">‘The thing must be gone about more carefully. </span>
      <span id="f0364">Suppose now,’ he added excitedly, speaking by fits and starts, as if he were thinking aloud, ‘suppose we rent a cottage by the month. </span>
      <span id="f0365">A householder can buy a packing-case without remark. </span>
      <span id="f0366">Then suppose we clear the people out today, get the packing-case tonight, and tomorrow I hire a carriage or a cart that we could drive ourselves--and take the box, or whatever we get, to Ringwood or Lyndhurst or somewhere; we could label it “specimens”, don’t you see? </span>
      <span id="f0367">Johnny, I believe I’ve hit the nail at last.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0368">‘Well, it sounds more feasible,’ admitted John.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0369">‘Of course we must take assumed names,’ continued Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0370">‘It would never do to keep our own. </span>
      <span id="f0371">What do you say to “Masterman” itself? </span>
      <span id="f0372">It sounds quiet and dignified.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0373">‘I will NOT take the name of Masterman,’ returned his brother; ‘you may, if you like. </span>
      <span id="f0374">I shall call myself Vance--the Great Vance; positively the last six nights. </span>
      <span id="f0375">There’s some go in a name like that.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0376">‘Vance?’ cried Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0377">‘Do you think we are playing a pantomime for our amusement? </span>
      <span id="f0378">There was never anybody named Vance who wasn’t a music-hall singer.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0379">‘That’s the beauty of it,’ returned John; ‘it gives you some standing at once. </span>
      <span id="f0380">You may call yourself Fortescue till all’s blue, and nobody cares; but to be Vance gives a man a natural nobility.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0381">‘But there’s lots of other theatrical names,’ cried Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0382">‘Leybourne, Irving, Brough, Toole--’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0383">‘Devil a one will I take!’ returned his brother. </span>
      <span id="f0384">‘I am going to have my little lark out of this as well as you.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0385">‘Very well,’ said Morris, who perceived that John was determined to carry his point, ‘I shall be Robert Vance.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0386">‘And I shall be George Vance,’ cried John, ‘the only original George Vance! </span>
      <span id="f0387">Rally round the only original!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0388">Repairing as well as they were able the disorder of their clothes, the Finsbury brothers returned to Browndean by a circuitous route in quest of luncheon and a suitable cottage. </span>
      <span id="f0389">It is not always easy to drop at a moment’s notice on a furnished residence in a retired locality; but fortune presently introduced our adventurers to a deaf carpenter, a man rich in cottages of the required description, and unaffectedly eager to supply their wants. </span>
      <span id="f0390">The second place they visited, standing, as it did, about a mile and a half from any neighbours, caused them to exchange a glance of hope. </span>
      <span id="f0391">On a nearer view, the place was not without depressing features. </span>
      <span id="f0392">It stood in a marshy-looking hollow of a heath; tall trees obscured its windows; the thatch visibly rotted on the rafters; and the walls were stained with splashes of unwholesome green. </span>
      <span id="f0393">The rooms were small, the ceilings low, the furniture merely nominal; a strange chill and a haunting smell of damp pervaded the kitchen; and the bedroom boasted only of one bed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0394">Morris, with a view to cheapening the place, remarked on this defect.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0395">‘Well,’ returned the man; ‘if you can’t sleep two abed, you’d better take a villa residence.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0396">‘And then,’ pursued Morris, ‘there’s no water. </span>
      <span id="f0397">How do you get your water?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0398">‘We fill THAT from the spring,’ replied the carpenter, pointing to a big barrel that stood beside the door. </span>
      <span id="f0399">‘The spring ain’t so VERY far off, after all, and it’s easy brought in buckets. </span>
      <span id="f0400">There’s a bucket there.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0401">Morris nudged his brother as they examined the water-butt. </span>
      <span id="f0402">It was new, and very solidly constructed for its office. </span>
      <span id="f0403">If anything had been wanting to decide them, this eminently practical barrel would have turned the scale. </span>
      <span id="f0404">A bargain was promptly struck, the month’s rent was paid upon the nail, and about an hour later the Finsbury brothers might have been observed returning to the blighted cottage, having along with them the key, which was the symbol of their tenancy, a spirit-lamp, with which they fondly told themselves they would be able to cook, a pork pie of suitable dimensions, and a quart of the worst whisky in Hampshire. </span>
      <span id="f0405">Nor was this all they had effected; already (under the plea that they were landscape-painters) they had hired for dawn on the morrow a light but solid two-wheeled cart; so that when they entered in their new character, they were able to tell themselves that the back of the business was already broken.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0406">John proceeded to get tea; while Morris, foraging about the house, was presently delighted by discovering the lid of the water-butt upon the kitchen shelf. </span>
      <span id="f0407">Here, then, was the packing-case complete; in the absence of straw, the blankets (which he himself, at least, had not the smallest intention of using for their present purpose) would exactly take the place of packing; and Morris, as the difficulties began to vanish from his path, rose almost to the brink of exultation. </span>
      <span id="f0408">There was, however, one difficulty not yet faced, one upon which his whole scheme depended. </span>
      <span id="f0409">Would John consent to remain alone in the cottage? </span>
      <span id="f0410">He had not yet dared to put the question.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0411">It was with high good-humour that the pair sat down to the deal table, and proceeded to fall-to on the pork pie. </span>
      <span id="f0412">Morris retailed the discovery of the lid, and the Great Vance was pleased to applaud by beating on the table with his fork in true music-hall style.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0413">‘That’s the dodge,’ he cried. </span>
      <span id="f0414">‘I always said a water-butt was what you wanted for this business.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0415">‘Of course,’ said Morris, thinking this a favourable opportunity to prepare his brother, ‘of course you must stay on in this place till I give the word; I’ll give out that uncle is resting in the New Forest. </span>
      <span id="f0416">It would not do for both of us to appear in London; we could never conceal the absence of the old man.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0417">John’s jaw dropped.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0418">‘O, come!’ he cried. </span>
      <span id="f0419">‘You can stay in this hole yourself. </span>
      <span id="f0420">I won’t.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0421">The colour came into Morris’s cheeks. </span>
      <span id="f0422">He saw that he must win his brother at any cost.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0423">‘You must please remember, Johnny,’ he said, ‘the amount of the tontine. </span>
      <span id="f0424">If I succeed, we shall have each fifty thousand to place to our bank account; ay, and nearer sixty.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0425">‘But if you fail,’ returned John, ‘what then? </span>
      <span id="f0426">What’ll be the colour of our bank account in that case?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0427">‘I will pay all expenses,’ said Morris, with an inward struggle; ‘you shall lose nothing.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0428">‘Well,’ said John, with a laugh, ‘if the ex-s are yours, and half-profits mine, I don’t mind remaining here for a couple of days.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0429">‘A couple of days!’ cried Morris, who was beginning to get angry and controlled himself with difficulty; ‘why, you would do more to win five pounds on a horse-race!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0430">‘Perhaps I would,’ returned the Great Vance; ‘it’s the artistic temperament.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0431">‘This is monstrous!’ burst out Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0432">‘I take all risks; I pay all expenses; I divide profits; and you won’t take the slightest pains to help me. </span>
      <span id="f0433">It’s not decent; it’s not honest; it’s not even kind.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0434">‘But suppose,’ objected John, who was considerably impressed by his brother’s vehemence, ‘suppose that Uncle Masterman is alive after all, and lives ten years longer; must I rot here all that time?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0435">‘Of course not,’ responded Morris, in a more conciliatory tone; ‘I only ask a month at the outside; and if Uncle Masterman is not dead by that time you can go abroad.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0436">‘Go abroad?’ repeated John eagerly. </span>
      <span id="f0437">‘Why shouldn’t I go at once? </span>
      <span id="f0438">Tell ‘em that Joseph and I are seeing life in Paris.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0439">‘Nonsense,’ said Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0440">‘Well, but look here,’ said John; ‘it’s this house, it’s such a pig-sty, it’s so dreary and damp. </span>
      <span id="f0441">You said yourself that it was damp.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0442">‘Only to the carpenter,’ Morris distinguished, ‘and that was to reduce the rent. </span>
      <span id="f0443">But really, you know, now we’re in it, I’ve seen worse.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0444">‘And what am I to do?’ complained the victim. </span>
      <span id="f0445">‘How can I entertain a friend?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0446">‘My dear Johnny, if you don’t think the tontine worth a little trouble, say so, and I’ll give the business up.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0447">‘You’re dead certain of the figures, I suppose?’ asked John. </span>
      <span id="f0448">‘Well’--with a deep sigh--‘send me the Pink Un and all the comic papers regularly. </span>
      <span id="f0449">I’ll face the music.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0450">As afternoon drew on, the cottage breathed more thrillingly of its native marsh; a creeping chill inhabited its chambers; the fire smoked, and a shower of rain, coming up from the channel on a slant of wind, tingled on the window-panes. </span>
      <span id="f0451">At intervals, when the gloom deepened toward despair, Morris would produce the whisky-bottle, and at first John welcomed the diversion--not for long. </span>
      <span id="f0452">It has been said this spirit was the worst in Hampshire; only those acquainted with the county can appreciate the force of that superlative; and at length even the Great Vance (who was no connoisseur) waved the decoction from his lips. </span>
      <span id="f0453">The approach of dusk, feebly combated with a single tallow candle, added a touch of tragedy; and John suddenly stopped whistling through his fingers--an art to the practice of which he had been reduced--and bitterly lamented his concessions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0454">‘I can’t stay here a month,’ he cried. </span>
      <span id="f0455">‘No one could. </span>
      <span id="f0456">The thing’s nonsense, Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0457">The parties that lived in the Bastille would rise against a place like this.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0458">With an admirable affectation of indifference, Morris proposed a game of pitch-and-toss. </span>
      <span id="f0459">To what will not the diplomatist condescend! </span>
      <span id="f0460">It was John’s favourite game; indeed his only game--he had found all the rest too intellectual--and he played it with equal skill and good fortune. </span>
      <span id="f0461">To Morris himself, on the other hand, the whole business was detestable; he was a bad pitcher, he had no luck in tossing, and he was one who suffered torments when he lost. </span>
      <span id="f0462">But John was in a dangerous humour, and his brother was prepared for any sacrifice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0463">By seven o’clock, Morris, with incredible agony, had lost a couple of half-crowns. </span>
      <span id="f0464">Even with the tontine before his eyes, this was as much as he could bear; and, remarking that he would take his revenge some other time, he proposed a bit of supper and a grog.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0465">Before they had made an end of this refreshment it was time to be at work. </span>
      <span id="f0466">A bucket of water for present necessities was withdrawn from the water-butt, which was then emptied and rolled before the kitchen fire to dry; and the two brothers set forth on their adventure under a starless heaven.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>