<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER V.  Mr Gideon Forsyth and the Gigantic Box</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0704">CHAPTER V.  Mr Gideon Forsyth and the Gigantic Box</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0706">It has been mentioned that at Bournemouth Julia sometimes made acquaintances; it is true she had but a glimpse of them before the doors of John Street closed again upon its captives, but the glimpse was sometimes exhilarating, and the consequent regret was tempered with hope. </span>
      <span id="f0707">Among those whom she had thus met a year before was a young barrister of the name of Gideon Forsyth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0708">About three o’clock of the eventful day when the magistrate tampered with the labels, a somewhat moody and distempered ramble had carried Mr Forsyth to the corner of John Street; and about the same moment Miss Hazeltine was called to the door of No. </span>
      <span id="f0709">16 by a thundering double knock.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0710">Mr Gideon Forsyth was a happy enough young man; he would have been happier if he had had more money and less uncle. </span>
      <span id="f0711">One hundred and twenty pounds a year was all his store; but his uncle, Mr Edward Hugh Bloomfield, supplemented this with a handsome allowance and a great deal of advice, couched in language that would probably have been judged intemperate on board a pirate ship. </span>
      <span id="f0712">Mr Bloomfield was indeed a figure quite peculiar to the days of Mr Gladstone; what we may call (for the lack of an accepted expression) a Squirradical. </span>
      <span id="f0713">Having acquired years without experience, he carried into the Radical side of politics those noisy, after-dinner-table passions, which we are more accustomed to connect with Toryism in its severe and senile aspects. </span>
      <span id="f0714">To the opinions of Mr Bradlaugh, in fact, he added the temper and the sympathies of that extinct animal, the Squire; he admired pugilism, he carried a formidable oaken staff, he was a reverent churchman, and it was hard to know which would have more volcanically stirred his choler--a person who should have defended the established church, or one who should have neglected to attend its celebrations. </span>
      <span id="f0715">He had besides some levelling catchwords, justly dreaded in the family circle; and when he could not go so far as to declare a step un-English, he might still (and with hardly less effect) denounce it as unpractical. </span>
      <span id="f0716">It was under the ban of this lesser excommunication that Gideon had fallen. </span>
      <span id="f0717">His views on the study of law had been pronounced unpractical; and it had been intimated to him, in a vociferous interview punctuated with the oaken staff, that he must either take a new start and get a brief or two, or prepare to live on his own money.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0718">No wonder if Gideon was moody. </span>
      <span id="f0719">He had not the slightest wish to modify his present habits; but he would not stand on that, since the recall of Mr Bloomfield’s allowance would revolutionize them still more radically. </span>
      <span id="f0720">He had not the least desire to acquaint himself with law; he had looked into it already, and it seemed not to repay attention; but upon this also he was ready to give way. </span>
      <span id="f0721">In fact, he would go as far as he could to meet the views of his uncle, the Squirradical. </span>
      <span id="f0722">But there was one part of the programme that appeared independent of his will. </span>
      <span id="f0723">How to get a brief? </span>
      <span id="f0724">there was the question. </span>
      <span id="f0725">And there was another and a worse. </span>
      <span id="f0726">Suppose he got one, should he prove the better man?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0727">Suddenly he found his way barred by a crowd. </span>
      <span id="f0728">A garishly illuminated van was backed against the kerb; from its open stern, half resting on the street, half supported by some glistening athletes, the end of the largest packing-case in the county of Middlesex might have been seen protruding; while, on the steps of the house, the burly person of the driver and the slim figure of a young girl stood as upon a stage, disputing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0729">‘It is not for us,’ the girl was saying. </span>
      <span id="f0730">‘I beg you to take it away; it couldn’t get into the house, even if you managed to get it out of the van.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0731">‘I shall leave it on the pavement, then, and M. </span>
      <span id="f0732">Finsbury can arrange with the Vestry as he likes,’ said the vanman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0733">‘But I am not M. </span>
      <span id="f0734">Finsbury,’ expostulated the girl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0735">‘It doesn’t matter who you are,’ said the vanman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0736">‘You must allow me to help you, Miss Hazeltine,’ said Gideon, putting out his hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0737">Julia gave a little cry of pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f0738">‘O, Mr Forsyth,’ she cried, ‘I am so glad to see you; we must get this horrid thing, which can only have come here by mistake, into the house. </span>
      <span id="f0739">The man says we’ll have to take off the door, or knock two of our windows into one, or be fined by the Vestry or Custom House or something for leaving our parcels on the pavement.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0740">The men by this time had successfully removed the box from the van, had plumped it down on the pavement, and now stood leaning against it, or gazing at the door of No. </span>
      <span id="f0741">16, in visible physical distress and mental embarrassment. </span>
      <span id="f0742">The windows of the whole street had filled, as if by magic, with interested and entertained spectators.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0743">With as thoughtful and scientific an expression as he could assume, Gideon measured the doorway with his cane, while Julia entered his observations in a drawing-book. </span>
      <span id="f0744">He then measured the box, and, upon comparing his data, found that there was just enough space for it to enter. </span>
      <span id="f0745">Next, throwing off his coat and waistcoat, he assisted the men to take the door from its hinges. </span>
      <span id="f0746">And lastly, all bystanders being pressed into the service, the packing-case mounted the steps upon some fifteen pairs of wavering legs--scraped, loudly grinding, through the doorway--and was deposited at length, with a formidable convulsion, in the far end of the lobby, which it almost blocked. </span>
      <span id="f0747">The artisans of this victory smiled upon each other as the dust subsided. </span>
      <span id="f0748">It was true they had smashed a bust of Apollo and ploughed the wall into deep ruts; but, at least, they were no longer one of the public spectacles of London.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0749">‘Well, sir,’ said the vanman, ‘I never see such a job.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0750">Gideon eloquently expressed his concurrence in this sentiment by pressing a couple of sovereigns in the man’s hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0751">‘Make it three, sir, and I’ll stand Sam to everybody here!’ cried the latter, and, this having been done, the whole body of volunteer porters swarmed into the van, which drove off in the direction of the nearest reliable public-house. </span>
      <span id="f0752">Gideon closed the door on their departure, and turned to Julia; their eyes met; the most uncontrollable mirth seized upon them both, and they made the house ring with their laughter. </span>
      <span id="f0753">Then curiosity awoke in Julia’s mind, and she went and examined the box, and more especially the label.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0754">‘This is the strangest thing that ever happened,’ she said, with another burst of laughter. </span>
      <span id="f0755">‘It is certainly Morris’s handwriting, and I had a letter from him only this morning, telling me to expect a barrel. </span>
      <span id="f0756">Is there a barrel coming too, do you think, Mr Forsyth?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0757">“‘Statuary with Care, Fragile,’” read Gideon aloud from the painted warning on the box. </span>
      <span id="f0758">‘Then you were told nothing about this?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0759">‘No,’ responded Julia. </span>
      <span id="f0760">‘O, Mr Forsyth, don’t you think we might take a peep at it?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0761">‘Yes, indeed,’ cried Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f0762">‘Just let me have a hammer.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0763">‘Come down, and I’ll show you where it is,’ cried Julia. </span>
      <span id="f0764">‘The shelf is too high for me to reach’; and, opening the door of the kitchen stair, she bade Gideon follow her. </span>
      <span id="f0765">They found both the hammer and a chisel; but Gideon was surprised to see no sign of a servant. </span>
      <span id="f0766">He also discovered that Miss Hazeltine had a very pretty little foot and ankle; and the discovery embarrassed him so much that he was glad to fall at once upon the packing-case.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0767">He worked hard and earnestly, and dealt his blows with the precision of a blacksmith; Julia the while standing silently by his side, and regarding rather the workman than the work. </span>
      <span id="f0768">He was a handsome fellow; she told herself she had never seen such beautiful arms. </span>
      <span id="f0769">And suddenly, as though he had overheard these thoughts, Gideon turned and smiled to her. </span>
      <span id="f0770">She, too, smiled and coloured; and the double change became her so prettily that Gideon forgot to turn away his eyes, and, swinging the hammer with a will, discharged a smashing blow on his own knuckles. </span>
      <span id="f0771">With admirable presence of mind he crushed down an oath and substituted the harmless comment, ‘Butter fingers!’ But the pain was sharp, his nerve was shaken, and after an abortive trial he found he must desist from further operations.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0772">In a moment Julia was off to the pantry; in a moment she was back again with a basin of water and a sponge, and had begun to bathe his wounded hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0773">‘I am dreadfully sorry!’ said Gideon apologetically. </span>
      <span id="f0774">‘If I had had any manners I should have opened the box first and smashed my hand afterward. </span>
      <span id="f0775">It feels much better,’ he added. </span>
      <span id="f0776">‘I assure you it does.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0777">‘And now I think you are well enough to direct operations,’ said she. </span>
      <span id="f0778">‘Tell me what to do, and I’ll be your workman.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0779">‘A very pretty workman,’ said Gideon, rather forgetting himself. </span>
      <span id="f0780">She turned and looked at him, with a suspicion of a frown; and the indiscreet young man was glad to direct her attention to the packing-case. </span>
      <span id="f0781">The bulk of the work had been accomplished; and presently Julia had burst through the last barrier and disclosed a zone of straw. </span>
      <span id="f0782">in a moment they were kneeling side by side, engaged like haymakers; the next they were rewarded with a glimpse of something white and polished; and the next again laid bare an unmistakable marble leg.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0783">‘He is surely a very athletic person,’ said Julia.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0784">‘I never saw anything like it,’ responded Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f0785">‘His muscles stand out like penny rolls.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0786">Another leg was soon disclosed, and then what seemed to be a third. </span>
      <span id="f0787">This resolved itself, however, into a knotted club resting upon a pedestal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0788">‘It is a Hercules,’ cried Gideon; ‘I might have guessed that from his calf. </span>
      <span id="f0789">I’m supposed to be rather partial to statuary, but when it comes to Hercules, the police should interfere. </span>
      <span id="f0790">I should say,’ he added, glancing with disaffection at the swollen leg, ‘that this was about the biggest and the worst in Europe. </span>
      <span id="f0791">What in heaven’s name can have induced him to come here?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0792">‘I suppose nobody else would have a gift of him,’ said Julia. </span>
      <span id="f0793">‘And for that matter, I think we could have done without the monster very well.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0794">‘O, don’t say that,’ returned Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f0795">‘This has been one of the most amusing experiences of my life.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0796">‘I don’t think you’ll forget it very soon,’ said Julia. </span>
      <span id="f0797">‘Your hand will remind you.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0798">‘Well, I suppose I must be going,’ said Gideon reluctantly. </span>
      <span id="f0799">‘No,’ pleaded Julia. </span>
      <span id="f0800">‘Why should you? </span>
      <span id="f0801">Stay and have tea with me.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0802">‘If I thought you really wished me to stay,’ said Gideon, looking at his hat, ‘of course I should only be too delighted.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0803">‘What a silly person you must take me for!’ returned the girl. </span>
      <span id="f0804">‘Why, of course I do; and, besides, I want some cakes for tea, and I’ve nobody to send. </span>
      <span id="f0805">Here is the latchkey.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0806">Gideon put on his hat with alacrity, and casting one look at Miss Hazeltine, and another at the legs of Hercules, threw open the door and departed on his errand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0807">He returned with a large bag of the choicest and most tempting of cakes and tartlets, and found Julia in the act of spreading a small tea-table in the lobby.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0808">‘The rooms are all in such a state,’ she cried, ‘that I thought we should be more cosy and comfortable in our own lobby, and under our own vine and statuary.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0809">‘Ever so much better,’ cried Gideon delightedly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0810">‘O what adorable cream tarts!’ said Julia, opening the bag, ‘and the dearest little cherry tartlets, with all the cherries spilled out into the cream!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0811">‘Yes,’ said Gideon, concealing his dismay, ‘I knew they would mix beautifully; the woman behind the counter told me so.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0812">‘Now,’ said Julia, as they began their little festival, ‘I am going to show you Morris’s letter; read it aloud, please; perhaps there’s something I have missed.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0813">Gideon took the letter, and spreading it out on his knee, read as follows:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0814">DEAR JULIA, I write you from Browndean, where we are stopping over for a few days. </span>
      <span id="f0815">Uncle was much shaken in that dreadful accident, of which, I dare say, you have seen the account. </span>
      <span id="f0816">Tomorrow I leave him here with John, and come up alone; but before that, you will have received a barrel CONTAINING SPECIMENS FOR A FRIEND. </span>
      <span id="f0817">Do not open it on any account, but leave it in the lobby till I come.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0818">Yours in haste,</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0819">M. </span>
      <span id="f0820">FINSBURY.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0821">P.S.--Be sure and leave the barrel in the lobby.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0822">‘No,’ said Gideon, ‘there seems to be nothing about the monument,’ and he nodded, as he spoke, at the marble legs. </span>
      <span id="f0823">‘Miss Hazeltine,’ he continued, ‘would you mind me asking a few questions?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0824">‘Certainly not,’ replied Julia; ‘and if you can make me understand why Morris has sent a statue of Hercules instead of a barrel containing specimens for a friend, I shall be grateful till my dying day. </span>
      <span id="f0825">And what are specimens for a friend?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0826">‘I haven’t a guess,’ said Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f0827">‘Specimens are usually bits of stone, but rather smaller than our friend the monument. </span>
      <span id="f0828">Still, that is not the point. </span>
      <span id="f0829">Are you quite alone in this big house?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0830">‘Yes, I am at present,’ returned Julia. </span>
      <span id="f0831">‘I came up before them to prepare the house, and get another servant. </span>
      <span id="f0832">But I couldn’t get one I liked.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0833">‘Then you are utterly alone,’ said Gideon in amazement. </span>
      <span id="f0834">‘Are you not afraid?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0835">‘No,’ responded Julia stoutly. </span>
      <span id="f0836">‘I don’t see why I should be more afraid than you would be; I am weaker, of course, but when I found I must sleep alone in the house I bought a revolver wonderfully cheap, and made the man show me how to use it.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0837">‘And how do you use it?’ demanded Gideon, much amused at her courage.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0838">‘Why,’ said she, with a smile, ‘you pull the little trigger thing on top, and then pointing it very low, for it springs up as you fire, you pull the underneath little trigger thing, and it goes off as well as if a man had done it.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0839">‘And how often have you used it?’ asked Gideon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0840">‘O, I have not used it yet,’ said the determined young lady; ‘but I know how, and that makes me wonderfully courageous, especially when I barricade my door with a chest of drawers.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0841">‘I’m awfully glad they are coming back soon,’ said Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f0842">‘This business strikes me as excessively unsafe; if it goes on much longer, I could provide you with a maiden aunt of mine, or my landlady if you preferred.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0843">‘Lend me an aunt!’ cried Julia. </span>
      <span id="f0844">‘O, what generosity! </span>
      <span id="f0845">I begin to think it must have been you that sent the Hercules.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0846">‘Believe me,’ cried the young man, ‘I admire you too much to send you such an infamous work of art..’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0847">Julia was beginning to reply, when they were both startled by a knocking at the door.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0848">‘O, Mr Forsyth!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0849">‘Don’t be afraid, my dear girl,’ said Gideon, laying his hand tenderly on her arm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0850">‘I know it’s the police,’ she whispered. </span>
      <span id="f0851">‘They are coming to complain about the statue.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0852">The knock was repeated. </span>
      <span id="f0853">It was louder than before, and more impatient.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0854">‘It’s Morris,’ cried Julia, in a startled voice, and she ran to the door and opened it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0855">It was indeed Morris that stood before them; not the Morris of ordinary days, but a wild-looking fellow, pale and haggard, with bloodshot eyes, and a two-days’ beard upon his chin.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0856">‘The barrel!’ he cried. </span>
      <span id="f0857">‘Where’s the barrel that came this morning?’ And he stared about the lobby, his eyes, as they fell upon the legs of Hercules, literally goggling in his head. </span>
      <span id="f0858">‘What is that?’ he screamed. </span>
      <span id="f0859">‘What is that waxwork? </span>
      <span id="f0860">Speak, you fool! </span>
      <span id="f0861">What is that? </span>
      <span id="f0862">And where’s the barrel--the water-butt?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0863">‘No barrel came, Morris,’ responded Julia coldly. </span>
      <span id="f0864">‘This is the only thing that has arrived.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0865">‘This!’ shrieked the miserable man. </span>
      <span id="f0866">‘I never heard of it!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0867">‘It came addressed in your hand,’ replied Julia; ‘we had nearly to pull the house down to get it in, that is all that I can tell you.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0868">Morris gazed at her in utter bewilderment. </span>
      <span id="f0869">He passed his hand over his forehead; he leaned against the wall like a man about to faint. </span>
      <span id="f0870">Then his tongue was loosed, and he overwhelmed the girl with torrents of abuse. </span>
      <span id="f0871">Such fire, such directness, such a choice of ungentlemanly language, none had ever before suspected Morris to possess; and the girl trembled and shrank before his fury.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0872">‘You shall not speak to Miss Hazeltine in that way,’ said Gideon sternly. </span>
      <span id="f0873">‘It is what I will not suffer.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0874">‘I shall speak to the girl as I like,’ returned Morris, with a fresh outburst of anger. </span>
      <span id="f0875">‘I’ll speak to the hussy as she deserves.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0876">‘Not a word more, sir, not one word,’ cried Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f0877">‘Miss Hazeltine,’ he continued, addressing the young girl, ‘you cannot stay a moment longer in the same house with this unmanly fellow. </span>
      <span id="f0878">Here is my arm; let me take you where you will be secure from insult.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0879">‘Mr Forsyth,’ returned Julia, ‘you are right; I cannot stay here longer, and I am sure I trust myself to an honourable gentleman.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0880">Pale and resolute, Gideon offered her his arm, and the pair descended the steps, followed by Morris clamouring for the latchkey.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0881">Julia had scarcely handed the key to Morris before an empty hansom drove smartly into John Street. </span>
      <span id="f0882">It was hailed by both men, and as the cabman drew up his restive horse, Morris made a dash into the vehicle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0883">‘Sixpence above fare,’ he cried recklessly. </span>
      <span id="f0884">‘Waterloo Station for your life. </span>
      <span id="f0885">Sixpence for yourself!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0886">‘Make it a shilling, guv’ner,’ said the man, with a grin; ‘the other parties were first.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0887">‘A shilling then,’ cried Morris, with the inward reflection that he would reconsider it at Waterloo. </span>
      <span id="f0888">The man whipped up his horse, and the hansom vanished from John Street.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>