<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER VI. The Tribulations of Morris: Part the First</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0889">CHAPTER VI. The Tribulations of Morris: Part the First</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0891">As the hansom span through the streets of London, Morris sought to rally the forces of his mind. </span>
      <span id="f0892">The water-butt with the dead body had miscarried, and it was essential to recover it. </span>
      <span id="f0893">So much was clear; and if, by some blest good fortune, it was still at the station, all might be well. </span>
      <span id="f0894">If it had been sent out, however, if it were already in the hands of some wrong person, matters looked more ominous. </span>
      <span id="f0895">People who receive unexplained packages are usually keen to have them open; the example of Miss Hazeltine (whom he cursed again) was there to remind him of the circumstance; and if anyone had opened the water-butt--‘O Lord!’ cried Morris at the thought, and carried his hand to his damp forehead. </span>
      <span id="f0896">The private conception of any breach of law is apt to be inspiriting, for the scheme (while yet inchoate) wears dashing and attractive colours. </span>
      <span id="f0897">Not so in the least that part of the criminal’s later reflections which deal with the police. </span>
      <span id="f0898">That useful corps (as Morris now began to think) had scarce been kept sufficiently in view when he embarked upon his enterprise. </span>
      <span id="f0899">‘I must play devilish close,’ he reflected, and he was aware of an exquisite thrill of fear in the region of the spine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0900">‘Main line or loop?’ enquired the cabman, through the scuttle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0901">‘Main line,’ replied Morris, and mentally decided that the man should have his shilling after all. </span>
      <span id="f0902">‘It would be madness to attract attention,’ thought he. </span>
      <span id="f0903">‘But what this thing will cost me, first and last, begins to be a nightmare!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0904">He passed through the booking-office and wandered disconsolately on the platform. </span>
      <span id="f0905">It was a breathing-space in the day’s traffic. </span>
      <span id="f0906">There were few people there, and these for the most part quiescent on the benches. </span>
      <span id="f0907">Morris seemed to attract no remark, which was a good thing; but, on the other hand, he was making no progress in his quest. </span>
      <span id="f0908">Something must be done, something must be risked. </span>
      <span id="f0909">Every passing instant only added to his dangers. </span>
      <span id="f0910">Summoning all his courage, he stopped a porter, and asked him if he remembered receiving a barrel by the morning train. </span>
      <span id="f0911">He was anxious to get information, for the barrel belonged to a friend. </span>
      <span id="f0912">‘It is a matter of some moment,’ he added, ‘for it contains specimens.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0913">‘I was not here this morning, sir,’ responded the porter, somewhat reluctantly, ‘but I’ll ask Bill. </span>
      <span id="f0914">Do you recollect, Bill, to have got a barrel from Bournemouth this morning containing specimens?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0915">‘I don’t know about specimens,’ replied Bill; ‘but the party as received the barrel I mean raised a sight of trouble.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0916">‘What’s that?’ cried Morris, in the agitation of the moment pressing a penny into the man’s hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0917">‘You see, sir, the barrel arrived at one-thirty. </span>
      <span id="f0918">No one claimed it till about three, when a small, sickly--looking gentleman (probably a curate) came up, and sez he, “Have you got anything for Pitman?” or “Wili’m Bent Pitman,” if I recollect right. </span>
      <span id="f0919">“I don’t exactly know,” sez I, “but I rather fancy that there barrel bears that name.” The little man went up to the barrel, and seemed regularly all took aback when he saw the address, and then he pitched into us for not having brought what he wanted. </span>
      <span id="f0920">“I don’t care a damn what you want,” sez I to him, “but if you are Will’m Bent Pitman, there’s your barrel.”’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0921">‘Well, and did he take it?’ cried the breathless Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0922">‘Well, sir,’ returned Bill, ‘it appears it was a packing-case he was after. </span>
      <span id="f0923">The packing-case came; that’s sure enough, because it was about the biggest packing-case ever I clapped eyes on. </span>
      <span id="f0924">And this Pitman he seemed a good deal cut up, and he had the superintendent out, and they got hold of the vanman--him as took the packing-case. </span>
      <span id="f0925">Well, sir,’ continued Bill, with a smile, ‘I never see a man in such a state. </span>
      <span id="f0926">Everybody about that van was mortal, bar the horses. </span>
      <span id="f0927">Some gen’leman (as well as I could make out) had given the vanman a sov.; and so that was where the trouble come in, you see.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0928">‘But what did he say?’ gasped Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0929">‘I don’t know as he SAID much, sir,’ said Bill. </span>
      <span id="f0930">‘But he offered to fight this Pitman for a pot of beer. </span>
      <span id="f0931">He had lost his book, too, and the receipts, and his men were all as mortal as himself. </span>
      <span id="f0932">O, they were all like’--and Bill paused for a simile--‘like lords! </span>
      <span id="f0933">The superintendent sacked them on the spot.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0934">‘O, come, but that’s not so bad,’ said Morris, with a bursting sigh. </span>
      <span id="f0935">‘He couldn’t tell where he took the packing-case, then?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0936">‘Not he,’ said Bill, ‘nor yet nothink else.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0937">‘And what--what did Pitman do?’ asked Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0938">‘O, he went off with the barrel in a four-wheeler, very trembling like,’ replied Bill. </span>
      <span id="f0939">‘I don’t believe he’s a gentleman as has good health.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0940">‘Well, so the barrel’s gone,’ said Morris, half to himself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0941">‘You may depend on that, sir,’ returned the porter. </span>
      <span id="f0942">‘But you had better see the superintendent.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0943">‘Not in the least; it’s of no account,’ said Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0944">‘It only contained specimens.’ And he walked hastily away.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0945">Ensconced once more in a hansom, he proceeded to reconsider his position. </span>
      <span id="f0946">Suppose (he thought), suppose he should accept defeat and declare his uncle’s death at once? </span>
      <span id="f0947">He should lose the tontine, and with that the last hope of his seven thousand eight hundred pounds. </span>
      <span id="f0948">But on the other hand, since the shilling to the hansom cabman, he had begun to see that crime was expensive in its course, and, since the loss of the water-butt, that it was uncertain in its consequences. </span>
      <span id="f0949">Quietly at first, and then with growing heat, he reviewed the advantages of backing out. </span>
      <span id="f0950">It involved a loss; but (come to think of it) no such great loss after all; only that of the tontine, which had been always a toss-up, which at bottom he had never really expected. </span>
      <span id="f0951">He reminded himself of that eagerly; he congratulated himself upon his constant moderation. </span>
      <span id="f0952">He had never really expected the tontine; he had never even very definitely hoped to recover his seven thousand eight hundred pounds; he had been hurried into the whole thing by Michael’s obvious dishonesty. </span>
      <span id="f0953">Yes, it would probably be better to draw back from this high-flying venture, settle back on the leather business--</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0954">‘Great God!’ cried Morris, bounding in the hansom like a Jack-in-a-box. </span>
      <span id="f0955">‘I have not only not gained the tontine--I have lost the leather business!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0956">Such was the monstrous fact. </span>
      <span id="f0957">He had no power to sign; he could not draw a cheque for thirty shillings. </span>
      <span id="f0958">Until he could produce legal evidence of his uncle’s death, he was a penniless outcast--and as soon as he produced it he had lost the tontine! </span>
      <span id="f0959">There was no hesitation on the part of Morris; to drop the tontine like a hot chestnut, to concentrate all his forces on the leather business and the rest of his small but legitimate inheritance, was the decision of a single instant. </span>
      <span id="f0960">And the next, the full extent of his calamity was suddenly disclosed to him. </span>
      <span id="f0961">Declare his uncle’s death? </span>
      <span id="f0962">He couldn’t! </span>
      <span id="f0963">Since the body was lost Joseph had (in a legal sense) become immortal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0964">There was no created vehicle big enough to contain Morris and his woes. </span>
      <span id="f0965">He paid the hansom off and walked on he knew not whither.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0966">‘I seem to have gone into this business with too much precipitation,’ he reflected, with a deadly sigh. </span>
      <span id="f0967">‘I fear it seems too ramified for a person of my powers of mind.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0968">And then a remark of his uncle’s flashed into his memory: If you want to think clearly, put it all down on paper. </span>
      <span id="f0969">‘Well, the old boy knew a thing or two,’ said Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0970">‘I will try; but I don’t believe the paper was ever made that will clear my mind.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0971">He entered a place of public entertainment, ordered bread and cheese, and writing materials, and sat down before them heavily. </span>
      <span id="f0972">He tried the pen. </span>
      <span id="f0973">It was an excellent pen, but what was he to write? </span>
      <span id="f0974">‘I have it,’ cried Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0975">‘Robinson Crusoe and the double columns!’ He prepared his paper after that classic model, and began as follows:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0976">Bad. </span>
      <span id="f0977">---- Good.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0978">1. </span>
      <span id="f0979">I have lost my uncle’s body.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0980">1. </span>
      <span id="f0981">But then Pitman has found it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0982">‘Stop a bit,’ said Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0983">‘I am letting the spirit of antithesis run away with me. </span>
      <span id="f0984">Let’s start again.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0985">Bad. </span>
      <span id="f0986">---- Good.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0987">1. </span>
      <span id="f0988">I have lost my uncle’s body.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0989">1. </span>
      <span id="f0990">But then I no longer require to bury it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0991">2. </span>
      <span id="f0992">I have lost the tontine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0993">2.But I may still save that if Pitman disposes of the body, and      if I can find a physician who will stick at nothing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0994">3. </span>
      <span id="f0995">I have lost the leather business and the rest of my uncle’s      succession.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0996">3. </span>
      <span id="f0997">But not if Pitman gives the body up to the police.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0998">‘O, but in that case I go to gaol; I had forgot that,’ thought Morris. </span>
      <span id="f0999">‘Indeed, I don’t know that I had better dwell on that hypothesis at all; it’s all very well to talk of facing the worst; but in a case of this kind a man’s first duty is to his own nerve. </span>
      <span id="f1000">Is there any answer to No. </span>
      <span id="f1001">3? </span>
      <span id="f1002">Is there any possible good side to such a beastly bungle? </span>
      <span id="f1003">There must be, of course, or where would be the use of this double-entry business? </span>
      <span id="f1004">And--by George, I have it!’ he exclaimed; ‘it’s exactly the same as the last!’ And he hastily re-wrote the passage:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1005">Bad. </span>
      <span id="f1006">---- Good.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1007">3. </span>
      <span id="f1008">I have lost the leather business and the rest of my uncle’s      succession.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1009">3. </span>
      <span id="f1010">But not if I can find a physician who will stick at nothing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1011">‘This venal doctor seems quite a desideratum,’ he reflected. </span>
      <span id="f1012">‘I want him first to give me a certificate that my uncle is dead, so that I may get the leather business; and then that he’s alive--but here we are again at the incompatible interests!’ And he returned to his tabulation:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1013">Bad. </span>
      <span id="f1014">---- Good.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1015">4. </span>
      <span id="f1016">I have almost no money.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1017">4. </span>
      <span id="f1018">But there is plenty in the bank.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1019">5. </span>
      <span id="f1020">Yes, but I can’t get the money in the bank.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1021">5. </span>
      <span id="f1022">But--well, that seems unhappily to be the case.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1023">6. </span>
      <span id="f1024">I have left the bill for eight hundred pounds in Uncle      Joseph’s pocket.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1025">6. </span>
      <span id="f1026">But if Pitman is only a dishonest man, the presence of this      bill may lead him to keep the whole thing dark and throw the body      into the New Cut.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1027">7. </span>
      <span id="f1028">Yes, but if Pitman is dishonest and finds the bill, he will      know who Joseph is, and he may blackmail me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1029">7. </span>
      <span id="f1030">Yes, but if I am right about Uncle Masterman, I can blackmail      Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1031">8. </span>
      <span id="f1032">But I can’t blackmail Michael (which is, besides, a very      dangerous thing to do) until I find out.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1033">8. </span>
      <span id="f1034">Worse luck!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1035">9. </span>
      <span id="f1036">The leather business will soon want money for current      expenses, and I have none to give.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1037">9. </span>
      <span id="f1038">But the leather business is a sinking ship.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1039">10. </span>
      <span id="f1040">Yes, but it’s all the ship I have.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1041">10. </span>
      <span id="f1042">A fact.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1043">11. </span>
      <span id="f1044">John will soon want money, and I have none to give.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1045">11.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1046">12. </span>
      <span id="f1047">And the venal doctor will want money down.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1048">12.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1049">13. </span>
      <span id="f1050">And if Pitman is dishonest and don’t send me to gaol, he will      want a fortune.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1051">13.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1052">‘O, this seems to be a very one-sided business,’ exclaimed Morris. </span>
      <span id="f1053">‘There’s not so much in this method as I was led to think.’ He crumpled the paper up and threw it down; and then, the next moment, picked it up again and ran it over. </span>
      <span id="f1054">‘It seems it’s on the financial point that my position is weakest,’ he reflected. </span>
      <span id="f1055">‘Is there positively no way of raising the wind? </span>
      <span id="f1056">In a vast city like this, and surrounded by all the resources of civilization, it seems not to be conceived! </span>
      <span id="f1057">Let us have no more precipitation. </span>
      <span id="f1058">Is there nothing I can sell? </span>
      <span id="f1059">My collection of signet--’ But at the thought of scattering these loved treasures the blood leaped into Morris’s check. </span>
      <span id="f1060">‘I would rather die!’ he exclaimed, and, cramming his hat upon his head, strode forth into the streets.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1061">‘I MUST raise funds,’ he thought. </span>
      <span id="f1062">‘My uncle being dead, the money in the bank is mine, or would be mine but for the cursed injustice that has pursued me ever since I was an orphan in a commercial academy. </span>
      <span id="f1063">I know what any other man would do; any other man in Christendom would forge; although I don’t know why I call it forging, either, when Joseph’s dead, and the funds are my own. </span>
      <span id="f1064">When I think of that, when I think that my uncle is really as dead as mutton, and that I can’t prove it, my gorge rises at the injustice of the whole affair. </span>
      <span id="f1065">I used to feel bitterly about that seven thousand eight hundred pounds; it seems a trifle now! </span>
      <span id="f1066">Dear me, why, the day before yesterday I was comparatively happy.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1067">And Morris stood on the sidewalk and heaved another sobbing sigh.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1068">‘Then there’s another thing,’ he resumed; ‘can I? </span>
      <span id="f1069">Am I able? </span>
      <span id="f1070">Why didn’t I practise different handwritings while I was young? </span>
      <span id="f1071">How a fellow regrets those lost opportunities when he grows up! </span>
      <span id="f1072">But there’s one comfort: it’s not morally wrong; I can try it on with a clear conscience, and even if I was found out, I wouldn’t greatly care--morally, I mean. </span>
      <span id="f1073">And then, if I succeed, and if Pitman is staunch, there’s nothing to do but find a venal doctor; and that ought to be simple enough in a place like London. </span>
      <span id="f1074">By all accounts the town’s alive with them. </span>
      <span id="f1075">It wouldn’t do, of course, to advertise for a corrupt physician; that would be impolitic. </span>
      <span id="f1076">No, I suppose a fellow has simply to spot along the streets for a red lamp and herbs in the window, and then you go in and--and--and put it to him plainly; though it seems a delicate step.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1077">He was near home now, after many devious wanderings, and turned up John Street. </span>
      <span id="f1078">As he thrust his latchkey in the lock, another mortifying reflection struck him to the heart.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1079">‘Not even this house is mine till I can prove him dead,’ he snarled, and slammed the door behind him so that the windows in the attic rattled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1080">Night had long fallen; long ago the lamps and the shop-fronts had begun to glitter down the endless streets; the lobby was pitch--dark; and, as the devil would have it, Morris barked his shins and sprawled all his length over the pedestal of Hercules. </span>
      <span id="f1081">The pain was sharp; his temper was already thoroughly undermined; by a last misfortune his hand closed on the hammer as he fell; and, in a spasm of childish irritation, he turned and struck at the offending statue. </span>
      <span id="f1082">There was a splintering crash.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1083">‘O Lord, what have I done next?’ wailed Morris; and he groped his way to find a candle. </span>
      <span id="f1084">‘Yes,’ he reflected, as he stood with the light in his hand and looked upon the mutilated leg, from which about a pound of muscle was detached. </span>
      <span id="f1085">‘Yes, I have destroyed a genuine antique; I may be in for thousands!’ And then there sprung up in his bosom a sort of angry hope. </span>
      <span id="f1086">‘Let me see,’ he thought. </span>
      <span id="f1087">‘Julia’s got rid of--, there’s nothing to connect me with that beast Forsyth; the men were all drunk, and (what’s better) they’ve been all discharged. </span>
      <span id="f1088">O, come, I think this is another case of moral courage! </span>
      <span id="f1089">I’ll deny all knowledge of the thing.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1090">A moment more, and he stood again before the Hercules, his lips sternly compressed, the coal-axe and the meat-cleaver under his arm. </span>
      <span id="f1091">The next, he had fallen upon the packing-case. </span>
      <span id="f1092">This had been already seriously undermined by the operations of Gideon; a few well-directed blows, and it already quaked and gaped; yet a few more, and it fell about Morris in a shower of boards followed by an avalanche of straw.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1093">And now the leather-merchant could behold the nature of his task: and at the first sight his spirit quailed. </span>
      <span id="f1094">It was, indeed, no more ambitious a task for De Lesseps, with all his men and horses, to attack the hills of Panama, than for a single, slim young gentleman, with no previous experience of labour in a quarry, to measure himself against that bloated monster on his pedestal. </span>
      <span id="f1095">And yet the pair were well encountered: on the one side, bulk--on the other, genuine heroic fire.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1096">‘Down you shall come, you great big, ugly brute!’ cried Morris aloud, with something of that passion which swept the Parisian mob against the walls of the Bastille. </span>
      <span id="f1097">‘Down you shall come, this night. </span>
      <span id="f1098">I’ll have none of you in my lobby.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1099">The face, from its indecent expression, had particularly animated the zeal of our iconoclast; and it was against the face that he began his operations. </span>
      <span id="f1100">The great height of the demigod--for he stood a fathom and half in his stocking-feet--offered a preliminary obstacle to this attack. </span>
      <span id="f1101">But here, in the first skirmish of the battle, intellect already began to triumph over matter. </span>
      <span id="f1102">By means of a pair of library steps, the injured householder gained a posture of advantage; and, with great swipes of the coal-axe, proceeded to decapitate the brute.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1103">Two hours later, what had been the erect image of a gigantic coal-porter turned miraculously white, was now no more than a medley of disjected members; the quadragenarian torso prone against the pedestal; the lascivious countenance leering down the kitchen stair; the legs, the arms, the hands, and even the fingers, scattered broadcast on the lobby floor. </span>
      <span id="f1104">Half an hour more, and all the debris had been laboriously carted to the kitchen; and Morris, with a gentle sentiment of triumph, looked round upon the scene of his achievements. </span>
      <span id="f1105">Yes, he could deny all knowledge of it now: the lobby, beyond the fact that it was partly ruinous, betrayed no trace of the passage of Hercules. </span>
      <span id="f1106">But it was a weary Morris that crept up to bed; his arms and shoulders ached, the palms of his hands burned from the rough kisses of the coal-axe, and there was one smarting finger that stole continually to his mouth. </span>
      <span id="f1107">Sleep long delayed to visit the dilapidated hero, and with the first peep of day it had again deserted him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1108">The morning, as though to accord with his disastrous fortunes, dawned inclemently. </span>
      <span id="f1109">An easterly gale was shouting in the streets; flaws of rain angrily assailed the windows; and as Morris dressed, the draught from the fireplace vividly played about his legs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1110">‘I think,’ he could not help observing bitterly, ‘that with all I have to bear, they might have given me decent weather.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1111">There was no bread in the house, for Miss Hazeltine (like all women left to themselves) had subsisted entirely upon cake. </span>
      <span id="f1112">But some of this was found, and (along with what the poets call a glass of fair, cold water) made up a semblance of a morning meal, and then down he sat undauntedly to his delicate task.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1113">Nothing can be more interesting than the study of signatures, written (as they are) before meals and after, during indigestion and intoxication; written when the signer is trembling for the life of his child or has come from winning the Derby, in his lawyer’s office, or under the bright eyes of his sweetheart. </span>
      <span id="f1114">To the vulgar, these seem never the same; but to the expert, the bank clerk, or the lithographer, they are constant quantities, and as recognizable as the North Star to the night-watch on deck.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1115">To all this Morris was alive. </span>
      <span id="f1116">In the theory of that graceful art in which he was now embarking, our spirited leather-merchant was beyond all reproach. </span>
      <span id="f1117">But, happily for the investor, forgery is an affair of practice. </span>
      <span id="f1118">And as Morris sat surrounded by examples of his uncle’s signature and of his own incompetence, insidious depression stole upon his spirits. </span>
      <span id="f1119">From time to time the wind wuthered in the chimney at his back; from time to time there swept over Bloomsbury a squall so dark that he must rise and light the gas; about him was the chill and the mean disorder of a house out of commission--the floor bare, the sofa heaped with books and accounts enveloped in a dirty table-cloth, the pens rusted, the paper glazed with a thick film of dust; and yet these were but adminicles of misery, and the true root of his depression lay round him on the table in the shape of misbegotten forgeries.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1120">‘It’s one of the strangest things I ever heard of,’ he complained. </span>
      <span id="f1121">‘It almost seems as if it was a talent that I didn’t possess.’ He went once more minutely through his proofs. </span>
      <span id="f1122">‘A clerk would simply gibe at them,’ said he. </span>
      <span id="f1123">‘Well, there’s nothing else but tracing possible.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1124">He waited till a squall had passed and there came a blink of scowling daylight. </span>
      <span id="f1125">Then he went to the window, and in the face of all John Street traced his uncle’s signature. </span>
      <span id="f1126">It was a poor thing at the best. </span>
      <span id="f1127">‘But it must do,’ said he, as he stood gazing woefully on his handiwork. </span>
      <span id="f1128">‘He’s dead, anyway.’ And he filled up the cheque for a couple of hundred and sallied forth for the Anglo-Patagonian Bank.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1129">There, at the desk at which he was accustomed to transact business, and with as much indifference as he could assume, Morris presented the forged cheque to the big, red-bearded Scots teller. </span>
      <span id="f1130">The teller seemed to view it with surprise; and as he turned it this way and that, and even scrutinized the signature with a magnifying-glass, his surprise appeared to warm into disfavour. </span>
      <span id="f1131">Begging to be excused for a moment, he passed away into the rearmost quarters of the bank; whence, after an appreciable interval, he returned again in earnest talk with a superior, an oldish and a baldish, but a very gentlemanly man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1132">‘Mr Morris Finsbury, I believe,’ said the gentlemanly man, fixing Morris with a pair of double eye-glasses.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1133">‘That is my name,’ said Morris, quavering. </span>
      <span id="f1134">‘Is there anything wrong.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1135">‘Well, the fact is, Mr Finsbury, you see we are rather surprised at receiving this,’ said the other, flicking at the cheque. </span>
      <span id="f1136">‘There are no effects.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1137">‘No effects?’ cried Morris. </span>
      <span id="f1138">‘Why, I know myself there must be eight-and-twenty hundred pounds, if there’s a penny.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1139">‘Two seven six four, I think,’ replied the gentlemanly man; ‘but it was drawn yesterday.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1140">‘Drawn!’ cried Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1141">‘By your uncle himself, sir,’ continued the other. </span>
      <span id="f1142">‘Not only that, but we discounted a bill for him for--let me see--how much was it for, Mr Bell?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1143">‘Eight hundred, Mr Judkin,’ replied the teller.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1144">‘Bent Pitman!’ cried Morris, staggering back.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1145">‘I beg your pardon,’ said Mr Judkin.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1146">‘It’s--it’s only an expletive,’ said Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1147">‘I hope there’s nothing wrong, Mr Finsbury,’ said Mr Bell.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1148">‘All I can tell you,’ said Morris, with a harsh laugh,’ is that the whole thing’s impossible. </span>
      <span id="f1149">My uncle is at Bournemouth, unable to move.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1150">‘Really!’ cried Mr Bell, and he recovered the cheque from Mr Judkin. </span>
      <span id="f1151">‘But this cheque is dated in London, and today,’ he observed. </span>
      <span id="f1152">‘How d’ye account for that, sir?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1153">‘O, that was a mistake,’ said Morris, and a deep tide of colour dyed his face and neck.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1154">‘No doubt, no doubt,’ said Mr Judkin, but he looked at his customer enquiringly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1155">‘And--and--’ resumed Morris, ‘even if there were no effects--this is a very trifling sum to overdraw--our firm--the name of Finsbury, is surely good enough for such a wretched sum as this.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1156">‘No doubt, Mr Finsbury,’ returned Mr Judkin; ‘and if you insist I will take it into consideration; but I hardly think--in short, Mr Finsbury, if there had been nothing else, the signature seems hardly all that we could wish.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1157">‘That’s of no consequence,’ replied Morris nervously. </span>
      <span id="f1158">‘I’ll get my uncle to sign another. </span>
      <span id="f1159">The fact is,’ he went on, with a bold stroke, ‘my uncle is so far from well at present that he was unable to sign this cheque without assistance, and I fear that my holding the pen for him may have made the difference in the signature.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1160">Mr Judkin shot a keen glance into Morris’s face; and then turned and looked at Mr Bell.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1161">‘Well,’ he said, ‘it seems as if we had been victimized by a swindler. </span>
      <span id="f1162">Pray tell Mr Finsbury we shall put detectives on at once. </span>
      <span id="f1163">As for this cheque of yours, I regret that, owing to the way it was signed, the bank can hardly consider it--what shall I say?--businesslike,’ and he returned the cheque across the counter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1164">Morris took it up mechanically; he was thinking of something very different.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1165">‘In a--case of this kind,’ he began, ‘I believe the loss falls on us; I mean upon my uncle and myself.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1166">‘It does not, sir,’ replied Mr Bell; ‘the bank is responsible, and the bank will either recover the money or refund it, you may depend on that.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1167">Morris’s face fell; then it was visited by another gleam of hope.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1168">‘I’ll tell you what,’ he said, ‘you leave this entirely in my hands. </span>
      <span id="f1169">I’ll sift the matter. </span>
      <span id="f1170">I’ve an idea, at any rate; and detectives,’ he added appealingly, ‘are so expensive.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1171">‘The bank would not hear of it,’ returned Mr Judkin. </span>
      <span id="f1172">‘The bank stands to lose between three and four thousand pounds; it will spend as much more if necessary. </span>
      <span id="f1173">An undiscovered forger is a permanent danger. </span>
      <span id="f1174">We shall clear it up to the bottom, Mr Finsbury; set your mind at rest on that.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1175">‘Then I’ll stand the loss,’ said Morris boldly. </span>
      <span id="f1176">‘I order you to abandon the search.’ He was determined that no enquiry should be made.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1177">‘I beg your pardon,’ returned Mr Judkin, ‘but we have nothing to do with you in this matter, which is one between your uncle and ourselves. </span>
      <span id="f1178">If he should take this opinion, and will either come here himself or let me see him in his sick-room--’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1179">‘Quite impossible,’ cried Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1180">‘Well, then, you see,’ said Mr Judkin, ‘how my hands are tied. </span>
      <span id="f1181">The whole affair must go at once into the hands of the police.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1182">Morris mechanically folded the cheque and restored it to his pocket--book.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1183">‘Good--morning,’ said he, and scrambled somehow out of the bank.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1184">‘I don’t know what they suspect,’ he reflected; ‘I can’t make them out, their whole behaviour is thoroughly unbusinesslike. </span>
      <span id="f1185">But it doesn’t matter; all’s up with everything. </span>
      <span id="f1186">The money has been paid; the police are on the scent; in two hours that idiot Pitman will be nabbed--and the whole story of the dead body in the evening papers.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1187">If he could have heard what passed in the bank after his departure he would have been less alarmed, perhaps more mortified.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1188">‘That was a curious affair, Mr Bell,’ said Mr Judkin.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1189">‘Yes, sir,’ said Mr Bell, ‘but I think we have given him a fright.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1190">‘O, we shall hear no more of Mr Morris Finsbury,’ returned the other; ‘it was a first attempt, and the house have dealt with us so long that I was anxious to deal gently. </span>
      <span id="f1191">But I suppose, Mr Bell, there can be no mistake about yesterday? </span>
      <span id="f1192">It was old Mr Finsbury himself?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1193">‘There could be no possible doubt of that,’ said Mr Bell with a chuckle. </span>
      <span id="f1194">‘He explained to me the principles of banking.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1195">‘Well, well,’ said Mr Judkin. </span>
      <span id="f1196">‘The next time he calls ask him to step into my room. </span>
      <span id="f1197">It is only proper he should be warned.’</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>