<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER VII. In Which William Dent Pitman takes Legal Advice</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1198">CHAPTER VII. In Which William Dent Pitman takes Legal Advice</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1200">Norfolk Street, King’s Road--jocularly known among Mr Pitman’s lodgers as ‘Norfolk Island’--is neither a long, a handsome, nor a pleasing thoroughfare. </span>
      <span id="f1201">Dirty, undersized maids-of-all-work issue from it in pursuit of beer, or linger on its sidewalk listening to the voice of love. </span>
      <span id="f1202">The cat’s-meat man passes twice a day. </span>
      <span id="f1203">An occasional organ-grinder wanders in and wanders out again, disgusted. </span>
      <span id="f1204">In holiday-time the street is the arena of the young bloods of the neighbourhood, and the householders have an opportunity of studying the manly art of self-defence. </span>
      <span id="f1205">And yet Norfolk Street has one claim to be respectable, for it contains not a single shop--unless you count the public-house at the corner, which is really in the King’s Road.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1206">The door of No. </span>
      <span id="f1207">7 bore a brass plate inscribed with the legend ‘W. </span>
      <span id="f1208">D. </span>
      <span id="f1209">Pitman, Artist’. </span>
      <span id="f1210">It was not a particularly clean brass plate, nor was No. </span>
      <span id="f1211">7 itself a particularly inviting place of residence. </span>
      <span id="f1212">And yet it had a character of its own, such as may well quicken the pulse of the reader’s curiosity. </span>
      <span id="f1213">For here was the home of an artist--and a distinguished artist too, highly distinguished by his ill-success--which had never been made the subject of an article in the illustrated magazines. </span>
      <span id="f1214">No wood-engraver had ever reproduced ‘a corner in the back drawing-room’ or ‘the studio mantelpiece’ of No. </span>
      <span id="f1215">7; no young lady author had ever commented on ‘the unaffected simplicity’ with which Mr Pitman received her in the midst of his ‘treasures’. </span>
      <span id="f1216">It is an omission I would gladly supply, but our business is only with the backward parts and ‘abject rear’ of this aesthetic dwelling.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1217">Here was a garden, boasting a dwarf fountain (that never played) in the centre, a few grimy-looking flowers in pots, two or three newly planted trees which the spring of Chelsea visited without noticeable consequence, and two or three statues after the antique, representing satyrs and nymphs in the worst possible style of sculptured art. </span>
      <span id="f1218">On one side the garden was overshadowed by a pair of crazy studios, usually hired out to the more obscure and youthful practitioners of British art. </span>
      <span id="f1219">Opposite these another lofty out-building, somewhat more carefully finished, and boasting of a communication with the house and a private door on the back lane, enshrined the multifarious industry of Mr Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1220">All day, it is true, he was engaged in the work of education at a seminary for young ladies; but the evenings at least were his own, and these he would prolong far into the night, now dashing off ‘A landscape with waterfall’ in oil, now a volunteer bust [‘in marble’, as he would gently but proudly observe) of some public character, now stooping his chisel to a mere ‘nymph’ for a gasbracket on a stair, sir’, or a life-size ‘Infant Samuel’ for a religious nursery. </span>
      <span id="f1221">Mr Pitman had studied in Paris, and he had studied in Rome, supplied with funds by a fond parent who went subsequently bankrupt in consequence of a fall in corsets; and though he was never thought to have the smallest modicum of talent, it was at one time supposed that he had learned his business. </span>
      <span id="f1222">Eighteen years of what is called ‘tuition’ had relieved him of the dangerous knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f1223">His artist lodgers would sometimes reason with him; they would point out to him how impossible it was to paint by gaslight, or to sculpture life-sized nymphs without a model.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1224">‘I know that,’ he would reply. </span>
      <span id="f1225">‘No one in Norfolk Street knows it better; and if I were rich I should certainly employ the best models in London; but, being poor, I have taught myself to do without them. </span>
      <span id="f1226">An occasional model would only disturb my ideal conception of the figure, and be a positive impediment in my career. </span>
      <span id="f1227">As for painting by an artificial light,’ he would continue, ‘that is simply a knack I have found it necessary to acquire, my days being engrossed in the work of tuition.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1228">At the moment when we must present him to our readers, Pitman was in his studio alone, by the dying light of the October day. </span>
      <span id="f1229">He sat (sure enough with ‘unaffected simplicity’) in a Windsor chair, his low-crowned black felt hat by his side; a dark, weak, harmless, pathetic little man, clad in the hue of mourning, his coat longer than is usual with the laity, his neck enclosed in a collar without a parting, his neckcloth pale in hue and simply tied; the whole outward man, except for a pointed beard, tentatively clerical. </span>
      <span id="f1230">There was a thinning on the top of Pitman’s head, there were silver hairs at Pitman’s temple. </span>
      <span id="f1231">Poor gentleman, he was no longer young; and years, and poverty, and humble ambition thwarted, make a cheerless lot.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1232">In front of him, in the corner by the door, there stood a portly barrel; and let him turn them where he might, it was always to the barrel that his eyes and his thoughts returned.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1233">‘Should I open it? </span>
      <span id="f1234">Should I return it? </span>
      <span id="f1235">Should I communicate with Mr Sernitopolis at once?’ he wondered. </span>
      <span id="f1236">‘No,’ he concluded finally, ‘nothing without Mr Finsbury’s advice.’ And he arose and produced a shabby leathern desk. </span>
      <span id="f1237">It opened without the formality of unlocking, and displayed the thick cream-coloured notepaper on which Mr Pitman was in the habit of communicating with the proprietors of schools and the parents of his pupils. </span>
      <span id="f1238">He placed the desk on the table by the window, and taking a saucer of Indian ink from the chimney-piece, laboriously composed the following letter:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1239">‘My dear Mr Finsbury,’ it ran, ‘would it be presuming on your kindness if I asked you to pay me a visit here this evening? </span>
      <span id="f1240">It is in no trifling matter that I invoke your valuable assistance, for need I say more than it concerns the welfare of Mr Semitopolis’s statue of Hercules? </span>
      <span id="f1241">I write you in great agitation of mind; for I have made all enquiries, and greatly fear that this work of ancient art has been mislaid. </span>
      <span id="f1242">I labour besides under another perplexity, not unconnected with the first. </span>
      <span id="f1243">Pray excuse the inelegance of this scrawl, and believe me yours in haste, William D. </span>
      <span id="f1244">Pitman.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1245">Armed with this he set forth and rang the bell of No. </span>
      <span id="f1246">233 King’s Road, the private residence of Michael Finsbury. </span>
      <span id="f1247">He had met the lawyer at a time of great public excitement in Chelsea; Michael, who had a sense of humour and a great deal of careless kindness in his nature, followed the acquaintance up, and, having come to laugh, remained to drop into a contemptuous kind of friendship. </span>
      <span id="f1248">By this time, which was four years after the first meeting, Pitman was the lawyer’s dog.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1249">‘No,’ said the elderly housekeeper, who opened the door in person, ‘Mr Michael’s not in yet. </span>
      <span id="f1250">But ye’re looking terribly poorly, Mr Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1251">Take a glass of sherry, sir, to cheer ye up.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1252">‘No, I thank you, ma’am,’ replied the artist. </span>
      <span id="f1253">‘It is very good in you, but I scarcely feel in sufficient spirits for sherry. </span>
      <span id="f1254">Just give Mr Finsbury this note, and ask him to look round--to the door in the lane, you will please tell him; I shall be in the studio all evening.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1255">And he turned again into the street and walked slowly homeward. </span>
      <span id="f1256">A hairdresser’s window caught his attention, and he stared long and earnestly at the proud, high--born, waxen lady in evening dress, who circulated in the centre of the show. </span>
      <span id="f1257">The artist woke in him, in spite of his troubles.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1258">‘It is all very well to run down the men who make these things,’ he cried, ‘but there’s a something--there’s a haughty, indefinable something about that figure. </span>
      <span id="f1259">It’s what I tried for in my “Empress Eugenie”,’ he added, with a sigh.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1260">And he went home reflecting on the quality. </span>
      <span id="f1261">‘They don’t teach you that direct appeal in Paris,’ he thought. </span>
      <span id="f1262">‘It’s British. </span>
      <span id="f1263">Come, I am going to sleep, I must wake up, I must aim higher--aim higher,’ cried the little artist to himself. </span>
      <span id="f1264">All through his tea and afterward, as he was giving his eldest boy a lesson on the fiddle, his mind dwelt no longer on his troubles, but he was rapt into the better land; and no sooner was he at liberty than he hastened with positive exhilaration to his studio.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1265">Not even the sight of the barrel could entirely cast him down. </span>
      <span id="f1266">He flung himself with rising zest into his work--a bust of Mr Gladstone from a photograph; turned (with extraordinary success) the difficulty of the back of the head, for which he had no documents beyond a hazy recollection of a public meeting; delighted himself by his treatment of the collar; and was only recalled to the cares of life by Michael Finsbury’s rattle at the door.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1267">‘Well, what’s wrong?’ said Michael, advancing to the grate, where, knowing his friend’s delight in a bright fire, Mr Pitman had not spared the fuel. </span>
      <span id="f1268">‘I suppose you have come to grief somehow.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1269">‘There is no expression strong enough,’ said the artist. </span>
      <span id="f1270">‘Mr Semitopolis’s statue has not turned up, and I am afraid I shall be answerable for the money; but I think nothing of that--what I fear, my dear Mr Finsbury, what I fear--alas that I should have to say it! </span>
      <span id="f1271">is exposure. </span>
      <span id="f1272">The Hercules was to be smuggled out of Italy; a thing positively wrong, a thing of which a man of my principles and in my responsible position should have taken (as I now see too late) no part whatever.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1273">‘This sounds like very serious work,’ said the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f1274">‘It will require a great deal of drink, Pitman.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1275">‘I took the liberty of--in short, of being prepared for you,’ replied the artist, pointing to a kettle, a bottle of gin, a lemon, and glasses. </span>
      <span id="f1276">Michael mixed himself a grog, and offered the artist a cigar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1277">‘No, thank you,’ said Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1278">‘I used occasionally to be rather partial to it, but the smell is so disagreeable about the clothes.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1279">‘All right,’ said the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f1280">‘I am comfortable now. </span>
      <span id="f1281">Unfold your tale.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1282">At some length Pitman set forth his sorrows. </span>
      <span id="f1283">He had gone today to Waterloo, expecting to receive the colossal Hercules, and he had received instead a barrel not big enough to hold Discobolus; yet the barrel was addressed in the hand (with which he was perfectly acquainted) of his Roman correspondent. </span>
      <span id="f1284">What was stranger still, a case had arrived by the same train, large enough and heavy enough to contain the Hercules; and this case had been taken to an address now undiscoverable. </span>
      <span id="f1285">‘The vanman (I regret to say it) had been drinking, and his language was such as I could never bring myself to repeat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1286">He was at once discharged by the superintendent of the line, who behaved most properly throughout, and is to make enquiries at Southampton. </span>
      <span id="f1287">In the meanwhile, what was I to do? </span>
      <span id="f1288">I left my address and brought the barrel home; but, remembering an old adage, I determined not to open it except in the presence of my lawyer.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1289">‘Is that all?’ asked Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1290">‘I don’t see any cause to worry. </span>
      <span id="f1291">The Hercules has stuck upon the road. </span>
      <span id="f1292">It will drop in tomorrow or the day after; and as for the barrel, depend upon it, it’s a testimonial from one of your young ladies, and probably contains oysters.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1293">‘O, don’t speak so loud!’ cried the little artist. </span>
      <span id="f1294">‘It would cost me my place if I were heard to speak lightly of the young ladies; and besides, why oysters from Italy? </span>
      <span id="f1295">and why should they come to me addressed in Signor Ricardi’s hand?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1296">‘Well, let’s have a look at it,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1297">‘Let’s roll it forward to the light.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1298">The two men rolled the barrel from the corner, and stood it on end before the fire.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1299">‘It’s heavy enough to be oysters,’ remarked Michael judiciously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1300">‘Shall we open it at once?’ enquired the artist, who had grown decidedly cheerful under the combined effects of company and gin; and without waiting for a reply, he began to strip as if for a prize-fight, tossed his clerical collar in the wastepaper basket, hung his clerical coat upon a nail, and with a chisel in one hand and a hammer in the other, struck the first blow of the evening.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1301">‘That’s the style, William Dent’ cried Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1302">‘There’s fire for--your money! </span>
      <span id="f1303">It may be a romantic visit from one of the young ladies--a sort of Cleopatra business. </span>
      <span id="f1304">Have a care and don’t stave in Cleopatra’s head.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1305">But the sight of Pitman’s alacrity was infectious. </span>
      <span id="f1306">The lawyer could sit still no longer. </span>
      <span id="f1307">Tossing his cigar into the fire, he snatched the instrument from the unwilling hands of the artist, and fell to himself. </span>
      <span id="f1308">Soon the sweat stood in beads upon his large, fair brow; his stylish trousers were defaced with iron rust, and the state of his chisel testified to misdirected energies.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1309">A cask is not an easy thing to open, even when you set about it in the right way; when you set about it wrongly, the whole structure must be resolved into its elements. </span>
      <span id="f1310">Such was the course pursued alike by the artist and the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f1311">Presently the last hoop had been removed--a couple of smart blows tumbled the staves upon the ground--and what had once been a barrel was no more than a confused heap of broken and distorted boards.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1312">In the midst of these, a certain dismal something, swathed in blankets, remained for an instant upright, and then toppled to one side and heavily collapsed before the fire. </span>
      <span id="f1313">Even as the thing subsided, an eye-glass tingled to the floor and rolled toward the screaming Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1314">‘Hold your tongue!’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1315">He dashed to the house door and locked it; then, with a pale face and bitten lip, he drew near, pulled aside a corner of the swathing blanket, and recoiled, shuddering. </span>
      <span id="f1316">There was a long silence in the studio.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1317">‘Now tell me,’ said Michael, in a low voice: ‘Had you any hand in it?’ and he pointed to the body.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1318">The little artist could only utter broken and disjointed sounds.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1319">Michael poured some gin into a glass. </span>
      <span id="f1320">‘Drink that,’ he said. </span>
      <span id="f1321">‘Don’t be afraid of me. </span>
      <span id="f1322">I’m your friend through thick and thin.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1323">Pitman put the liquor down untasted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1324">‘I swear before God,’ he said, ‘this is another mystery to me. </span>
      <span id="f1325">In my worst fears I never dreamed of such a thing. </span>
      <span id="f1326">I would not lay a finger on a sucking infant.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1327">‘That’s all square,’ said Michael, with a sigh of huge relief. </span>
      <span id="f1328">‘I believe you, old boy.’ And he shook the artist warmly by the hand. </span>
      <span id="f1329">‘I thought for a moment,’ he added with rather a ghastly smile, ‘I thought for a moment you might have made away with Mr Semitopolis.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1330">‘It would make no difference if I had,’ groaned Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1331">‘All is at an end for me. </span>
      <span id="f1332">There’s the writing on the wall.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1333">‘To begin with,’ said Michael, ‘let’s get him out of sight; for to be quite plain with you, Pitman, I don’t like your friend’s appearance.’ And with that the lawyer shuddered. </span>
      <span id="f1334">‘Where can we put it?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1335">‘You might put it in the closet there--if you could bear to touch it,’ answered the artist.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1336">‘Somebody has to do it, Pitman,’ returned the lawyer; ‘and it seems as if it had to be me. </span>
      <span id="f1337">You go over to the table, turn your back, and mix me a grog; that’s a fair division of labour.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1338">About ninety seconds later the closet-door was heard to shut.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1339">‘There,’ observed Michael, ‘that’s more homelike. </span>
      <span id="f1340">You can turn now, my pallid Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1341">Is this the grog?’ he ran on. </span>
      <span id="f1342">‘Heaven forgive you, it’s a lemonade.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1343">‘But, O, Finsbury, what are we to do with it?’ walled the artist, laying a clutching hand upon the lawyer’s arm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1344">‘Do with it?’ repeated Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1345">‘Bury it in one of your flowerbeds, and erect one of your own statues for a monument. </span>
      <span id="f1346">I tell you we should look devilish romantic shovelling out the sod by the moon’s pale ray. </span>
      <span id="f1347">Here, put some gin in this.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1348">‘I beg of you, Mr Finsbury, do not trifle with my misery,’ cried Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1349">‘You see before you a man who has been all his life--I do not hesitate to say it--imminently respectable. </span>
      <span id="f1350">Even in this solemn hour I can lay my hand upon my heart without a blush. </span>
      <span id="f1351">Except on the really trifling point of the smuggling of the Hercules (and even of that I now humbly repent), my life has been entirely fit for publication. </span>
      <span id="f1352">I never feared the light,’ cried the little man; ‘and now--now--!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1353">‘Cheer up, old boy,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1354">‘I assure you we should count this little contretemps a trifle at the office; it’s the sort of thing that may occur to any one; and if you’re perfectly sure you had no hand in it--’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1355">‘What language am I to find--’ began Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1356">‘O, I’ll do that part of it,’ interrupted Michael, ‘you have no experience.’ But the point is this: If--or rather since--you know nothing of the crime, since the--the party in the closet--is neither your father, nor your brother, nor your creditor, nor your mother-in-law, nor what they call an injured husband--’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1357">‘O, my dear sir!’ interjected Pitman, horrified.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1358">‘Since, in short,’ continued the lawyer, ‘you had no possible interest in the crime, we have a perfectly free field before us and a safe game to play. </span>
      <span id="f1359">Indeed, the problem is really entertaining; it is one I have long contemplated in the light of an A. </span>
      <span id="f1360">B. </span>
      <span id="f1361">case; here it is at last under my hand in specie; and I mean to pull you through. </span>
      <span id="f1362">Do you hear that?--I mean to pull you through. </span>
      <span id="f1363">Let me see: it’s a long time since I have had what I call a genuine holiday; I’ll send an excuse tomorrow to the office. </span>
      <span id="f1364">We had best be lively,’ he added significantly; ‘for we must not spoil the market for the other man.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1365">‘What do you mean?’ enquired Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1366">‘What other man? </span>
      <span id="f1367">The inspector of police?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1368">‘Damn the inspector of police!’ remarked his companion. </span>
      <span id="f1369">‘If you won’t take the short cut and bury this in your back garden, we must find some one who will bury it in his. </span>
      <span id="f1370">We must place the affair, in short, in the hands of some one with fewer scruples and more resources.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1371">‘A private detective, perhaps?’ suggested Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1372">‘There are times when you fill me with pity,’ observed the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f1373">‘By the way, Pitman,’ he added in another key, ‘I have always regretted that you have no piano in this den of yours. </span>
      <span id="f1374">Even if you don’t play yourself, your friends might like to entertain themselves with a little music while you were mudding.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1375">‘I shall get one at once if you like,’ said Pitman nervously, anxious to please. </span>
      <span id="f1376">‘I play the fiddle a little as it is.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1377">‘I know you do,’ said Michael; ‘but what’s the fiddle--above all as you play it? </span>
      <span id="f1378">What you want is polyphonic music. </span>
      <span id="f1379">And I’ll tell you what it is--since it’s too late for you to buy a piano I’ll give you mine.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1380">‘Thank you,’ said the artist blankly. </span>
      <span id="f1381">‘You will give me yours? </span>
      <span id="f1382">I am sure it’s very good in you.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1383">‘Yes, I’ll give you mine,’ continued Michael, ‘for the inspector of police to play on while his men are digging up your back garden.’ Pitman stared at him in pained amazement.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1384">‘No, I’m not insane,’ Michael went on. </span>
      <span id="f1385">‘I’m playful, but quite coherent. </span>
      <span id="f1386">See here, Pitman: follow me one half minute. </span>
      <span id="f1387">I mean to profit by the refreshing fact that we are really and truly innocent; nothing but the presence of the--you know what--connects us with the crime; once let us get rid of it, no matter how, and there is no possible clue to trace us by. </span>
      <span id="f1388">Well, I give you my piano; we’ll bring it round this very night. </span>
      <span id="f1389">Tomorrow we rip the fittings out, deposit the--our friend--inside, plump the whole on a cart, and carry it to the chambers of a young gentleman whom I know by sight.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1390">‘Whom do you know by sight?’ repeated Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1391">‘And what is more to the purpose,’ continued Michael, ‘whose chambers I know better than he does himself. </span>
      <span id="f1392">A friend of mine--I call him my friend for brevity; he is now, I understand, in Demerara and (most likely) in gaol--was the previous occupant. </span>
      <span id="f1393">I defended him, and I got him off too--all saved but honour; his assets were nil, but he gave me what he had, poor gentleman, and along with the rest--the key of his chambers. </span>
      <span id="f1394">It’s there that I propose to leave the piano and, shall we say, Cleopatra?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1395">‘It seems very wild,’ said Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1396">‘And what will become of the poor young gentleman whom you know by sight?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1397">‘It will do him good,’--said Michael cheerily. </span>
      <span id="f1398">‘Just what he wants to steady him.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1399">‘But, my dear sir, he might be involved in a charge of--a charge of murder,’ gulped the artist.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1400">‘Well, he’ll be just where we are,’ returned the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f1401">‘He’s innocent, you see. </span>
      <span id="f1402">What hangs people, my dear Pitman, is the unfortunate circumstance of guilt.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1403">‘But indeed, indeed,’ pleaded Pitman, ‘the whole scheme appears to me so wild. </span>
      <span id="f1404">Would it not be safer, after all, just to send for the police?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1405">‘And make a scandal?’ enquired Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1406">‘“The Chelsea Mystery; alleged innocence of Pitman”? </span>
      <span id="f1407">How would that do at the Seminary?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1408">‘It would imply my discharge,’ admitted the drawing--master. </span>
      <span id="f1409">‘I cannot deny that.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1410">‘And besides,’ said Michael, ‘I am not going to embark in such a business and have no fun for my money.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1411">‘O my dear sir, is that a proper spirit?’ cried Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1412">‘O, I only said that to cheer you up,’ said the unabashed Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1413">‘Nothing like a little judicious levity. </span>
      <span id="f1414">But it’s quite needless to discuss. </span>
      <span id="f1415">If you mean to follow my advice, come on, and let us get the piano at once. </span>
      <span id="f1416">If you don’t, just drop me the word, and I’ll leave you to deal with the whole thing according to your better judgement.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1417">‘You know perfectly well that I depend on you entirely,’ returned Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1418">‘But O, what a night is before me with that--horror in my studio! </span>
      <span id="f1419">How am I to think of it on my pillow?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1420">‘Well, you know, my piano will be there too,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1421">‘That’ll raise the average.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1422">An hour later a cart came up the lane, and the lawyer’s piano--a momentous Broadwood grand--was deposited in Mr Pitman’s studio.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>