<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER VIII. In Which Michael Finsbury Enjoys a Holiday</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1423">CHAPTER VIII. In Which Michael Finsbury Enjoys a Holiday</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1425">Punctually at eight o’clock next morning the lawyer rattled (according to previous appointment) on the studio door. </span>
      <span id="f1426">He found the artist sadly altered for the worse--bleached, bloodshot, and chalky--a man upon wires, the tail of his haggard eye still wandering to the closet. </span>
      <span id="f1427">Nor was the professor of drawing less inclined to wonder at his friend. </span>
      <span id="f1428">Michael was usually attired in the height of fashion, with a certain mercantile brilliancy best described perhaps as stylish; nor could anything be said against him, as a rule, but that he looked a trifle too like a wedding guest to be quite a gentleman. </span>
      <span id="f1429">Today he had fallen altogether from these heights. </span>
      <span id="f1430">He wore a flannel shirt of washed-out shepherd’s tartan, and a suit of reddish tweeds, of the colour known to tailors as ‘heather mixture’; his neckcloth was black, and tied loosely in a sailor’s knot; a rusty ulster partly concealed these advantages; and his feet were shod with rough walking boots. </span>
      <span id="f1431">His hat was an old soft felt, which he removed with a flourish as he entered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1432">‘Here I am, William Dent!’ he cried, and drawing from his pocket two little wisps of reddish hair, he held them to his cheeks like sidewhiskers and danced about the studio with the filmy graces of a ballet-girl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1433">Pitman laughed sadly. </span>
      <span id="f1434">‘I should never have known you,’ said he.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1435">‘Nor were you intended to,’ returned Michael, replacing his false whiskers in his pocket. </span>
      <span id="f1436">‘Now we must overhaul you and your wardrobe, and disguise you up to the nines.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1437">‘Disguise!’ cried the artist. </span>
      <span id="f1438">‘Must I indeed disguise myself. </span>
      <span id="f1439">Has it come to that?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1440">‘My dear creature,’ returned his companion, ‘disguise is the spice of life. </span>
      <span id="f1441">What is life, passionately exclaimed a French philosopher, without the pleasures of disguise? </span>
      <span id="f1442">I don’t say it’s always good taste, and I know it’s unprofessional; but what’s the odds, downhearted drawing-master? </span>
      <span id="f1443">It has to be. </span>
      <span id="f1444">We have to leave a false impression on the minds of many persons, and in particular on the mind of Mr Gideon Forsyth--the young gentleman I know by sight--if he should have the bad taste to be at home.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1445">‘If he be at home?’ faltered the artist. </span>
      <span id="f1446">‘That would be the end of all.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1447">‘Won’t matter a d--,’ returned Michael airily. </span>
      <span id="f1448">‘Let me see your clothes, and I’ll make a new man of you in a jiffy.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1449">In the bedroom, to which he was at once conducted, Michael examined Pitman’s poor and scanty wardrobe with a humorous eye, picked out a short jacket of black alpaca, and presently added to that a pair of summer trousers which somehow took his fancy as incongruous. </span>
      <span id="f1450">Then, with the garments in his hand, he scrutinized the artist closely.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1451">‘I don’t like that clerical collar,’ he remarked. </span>
      <span id="f1452">‘Have you nothing else?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1453">The professor of drawing pondered for a moment, and then brightened; ‘I have a pair of low-necked shirts,’ he said, ‘that I used to wear in Paris as a student. </span>
      <span id="f1454">They are rather loud.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1455">‘The very thing!’ ejaculated Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1456">‘You’ll look perfectly beastly. </span>
      <span id="f1457">Here are spats, too,’ he continued, drawing forth a pair of those offensive little gaiters. </span>
      <span id="f1458">‘Must have spats! </span>
      <span id="f1459">And now you jump into these, and whistle a tune at the window for (say) three-quarters of an hour. </span>
      <span id="f1460">After that you can rejoin me on the field of glory.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1461">So saying, Michael returned to the studio. </span>
      <span id="f1462">It was the morning of the easterly gale; the wind blew shrilly among the statues in the garden, and drove the rain upon the skylight in the studio ceiling; and at about the same moment of the time when Morris attacked the hundredth version of his uncle’s signature in Bloomsbury, Michael, in Chelsea, began to rip the wires out of the Broadwood grand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1463">Three-quarters of an hour later Pitman was admitted, to find the closet-door standing open, the closet untenanted, and the piano discreetly shut.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1464">‘It’s a remarkably heavy instrument,’ observed Michael, and turned to consider his friend’s disguise. </span>
      <span id="f1465">‘You must shave off that beard of yours,’ he said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1466">‘My beard!’ cried Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1467">‘I cannot shave my beard. </span>
      <span id="f1468">I cannot tamper with my appearance--my principals would object. </span>
      <span id="f1469">They hold very strong views as to the appearance of the professors--young ladies are considered so romantic. </span>
      <span id="f1470">My beard was regarded as quite a feature when I went about the place. </span>
      <span id="f1471">It was regarded,’ said the artist, with rising colour, ‘it was regarded as unbecoming.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1472">‘You can let it grow again,’ returned Michael, ‘and then you’ll be so precious ugly that they’ll raise your salary.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1473">‘But I don’t want to be ugly,’ cried the artist.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1474">‘Don’t be an ass,’ said Michael, who hated beards and was delighted to destroy one. </span>
      <span id="f1475">‘Off with it like a man!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1476">‘Of course, if you insist,’ said Pitman; and then he sighed, fetched some hot water from the kitchen, and setting a glass upon his easel, first clipped his beard with scissors and then shaved his chin. </span>
      <span id="f1477">He could not conceal from himself, as he regarded the result, that his last claims to manhood had been sacrificed, but Michael seemed delighted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1478">‘A new man, I declare!’ he cried. </span>
      <span id="f1479">‘When I give you the windowglass spectacles I have in my pocket, you’ll be the beau-ideal of a French commercial traveller.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1480">Pitman did not reply, but continued to gaze disconsolately on his image in the glass.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1481">‘Do you know,’ asked Michael, ‘what the Governor of South Carolina said to the Governor of North Carolina? </span>
      <span id="f1482">“It’s a long time between drinks,”  observed that powerful thinker; and if you will put your hand into the top left-hand pocket of my ulster, I have an impression you will find a flask of brandy. </span>
      <span id="f1483">Thank you, Pitman,’ he added, as he filled out a glass for each. </span>
      <span id="f1484">‘Now you will give me news of this.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1485">The artist reached out his hand for the water-jug, but Michael arrested the movement.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1486">‘Not if you went upon your knees!’ he cried. </span>
      <span id="f1487">‘This is the finest liqueur brandy in Great Britain.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1488">Pitman put his lips to it, set it down again, and sighed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1489">‘Well, I must say you’re the poorest companion for a holiday!’ cried Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1490">‘If that’s all you know of brandy, you shall have no more of it; and while I finish the flask, you may as well begin business. </span>
      <span id="f1491">Come to think of it,’ he broke off, ‘I have made an abominable error: you should have ordered the cart before you were disguised. </span>
      <span id="f1492">Why, Pitman, what the devil’s the use of you? </span>
      <span id="f1493">why couldn’t you have reminded me of that?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1494">‘I never even knew there was a cart to be ordered,’ said the artist. </span>
      <span id="f1495">‘But I can take off the disguise again,’ he suggested eagerly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1496">‘You would find it rather a bother to put on your beard,’ observed the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f1497">‘No, it’s a false step; the sort of thing that hangs people,’ he continued, with eminent cheerfulness, as he sipped his brandy; ‘and it can’t be retraced now. </span>
      <span id="f1498">Off to the mews with you, make all the arrangements; they’re to take the piano from here, cart it to Victoria, and dispatch it thence by rail to Cannon Street, to lie till called for in the name of Fortune du Boisgobey.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1499">‘Isn’t that rather an awkward name?’ pleaded Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1500">‘Awkward?’ cried Michael scornfully. </span>
      <span id="f1501">‘It would hang us both! </span>
      <span id="f1502">Brown is both safer and easier to pronounce. </span>
      <span id="f1503">Call it Brown.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1504">‘I wish,’ said Pitman, ‘for my sake, I wish you wouldn’t talk so much of hanging.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1505">‘Talking about it’s nothing, my boy!’ returned Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1506">‘But take your hat and be off, and mind and pay everything beforehand.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1507">Left to himself, the lawyer turned his attention for some time exclusively to the liqueur brandy, and his spirits, which had been pretty fair all morning, now prodigiously rose. </span>
      <span id="f1508">He proceeded to adjust his whiskers finally before the glass. </span>
      <span id="f1509">‘Devilish rich,’ he remarked, as he contemplated his reflection. </span>
      <span id="f1510">‘I look like a purser’s mate.’ And at that moment the window-glass spectacles (which he had hitherto destined for Pitman) flashed into his mind; he put them on, and fell in love with the effect. </span>
      <span id="f1511">‘Just what I required,’ he said. </span>
      <span id="f1512">‘I wonder what I look like now? </span>
      <span id="f1513">A humorous novelist, I should think,’ and he began to practise divers characters of walk, naming them to himself as--he proceeded. </span>
      <span id="f1514">‘Walk of a humorous novelist--but that would require an umbrella. </span>
      <span id="f1515">Walk of a purser’s mate. </span>
      <span id="f1516">Walk of an Australian colonist revisiting the scenes of childhood. </span>
      <span id="f1517">Walk of Sepoy colonel, ditto, ditto. </span>
      <span id="f1518">And in the midst of the Sepoy colonel (which was an excellent assumption, although inconsistent with the style of his make-up), his eye lighted on the piano. </span>
      <span id="f1519">This instrument was made to lock both at the top and at the keyboard, but the key of the latter had been mislaid. </span>
      <span id="f1520">Michael opened it and ran his fingers over the dumb keys. </span>
      <span id="f1521">‘Fine instrument--full, rich tone,’ he observed, and he drew in a seat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1522">When Mr Pitman returned to the studio, he was appalled to observe his guide, philosopher, and friend performing miracles of execution on the silent grand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1523">‘Heaven help me!’ thought the little man, ‘I fear he has been drinking! </span>
      <span id="f1524">Mr Finsbury,’ he said aloud; and Michael, without rising, turned upon him a countenance somewhat flushed, encircled with the bush of the red whiskers, and bestridden by the spectacles. </span>
      <span id="f1525">‘Capriccio in B-flat on the departure of a friend,’ said he, continuing his noiseless evolutions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1526">Indignation awoke in the mind of Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1527">‘Those spectacles were to be mine,’ he cried. </span>
      <span id="f1528">‘They are an essential part of my disguise.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1529">‘I am going to wear them myself,’ replied Michael; and he added, with some show of truth, ‘There would be a devil of a lot of suspicion aroused if we both wore spectacles.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1530">‘O, well,’ said the assenting Pitman, ‘I rather counted on them; but of course, if you insist. </span>
      <span id="f1531">And at any rate, here is the cart at the door.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1532">While the men were at work, Michael concealed himself in the closet among the debris of the barrel and the wires of the piano; and as soon as the coast was clear the pair sallied forth by the lane, jumped into a hansom in the King’s Road, and were driven rapidly toward town. </span>
      <span id="f1533">It was still cold and raw and boisterous; the rain beat strongly in their faces, but Michael refused to have the glass let down; he had now suddenly donned the character of cicerone, and pointed out and lucidly commented on the sights of London, as they drove. </span>
      <span id="f1534">‘My dear fellow,’ he said, ‘you don’t seem to know anything of your native city. </span>
      <span id="f1535">Suppose we visited the Tower? </span>
      <span id="f1536">No? </span>
      <span id="f1537">Well, perhaps it’s a trifle out of our way. </span>
      <span id="f1538">But, anyway--Here, cabby, drive round by Trafalgar Square!’ And on that historic battlefield he insisted on drawing up, while he criticized the statues and gave the artist many curious details (quite new to history) of the lives of the celebrated men they represented.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1539">It would be difficult to express what Pitman suffered in the cab: cold, wet, terror in the capital degree, a grounded distrust of the commander under whom he served, a sense of imprudency in the matter of the low-necked shirt, a bitter sense of the decline and fall involved in the deprivation of his beard, all these were among the ingredients of the bowl. </span>
      <span id="f1540">To reach the restaurant, for which they were deviously steering, was the first relief. </span>
      <span id="f1541">To hear Michael bespeak a private room was a second and a still greater. </span>
      <span id="f1542">Nor, as they mounted the stair under the guidance of an unintelligible alien, did he fail to note with gratitude the fewness of the persons present, or the still more cheering fact that the greater part of these were exiles from the land of France. </span>
      <span id="f1543">It was thus a blessed thought that none of them would be connected with the Seminary; for even the French professor, though admittedly a Papist, he could scarce imagine frequenting so rakish an establishment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1544">The alien introduced them into a small bare room with a single table, a sofa, and a dwarfish fire; and Michael called promptly for more coals and a couple of brandies and sodas.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1545">‘O, no,’ said Pitman, ‘surely not--no more to drink.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1546">‘I don’t know what you would be at,’ said Michael plaintively. </span>
      <span id="f1547">‘It’s positively necessary to do something; and one shouldn’t smoke before meals. </span>
      <span id="f1548">I thought that was understood. </span>
      <span id="f1549">You seem to have no idea of hygiene.’ And he compared his watch with the clock upon the chimney-piece.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1550">Pitman fell into bitter musing; here he was, ridiculously shorn, absurdly disguised, in the company of a drunken man in spectacles, and waiting for a champagne luncheon in a restaurant painfully foreign. </span>
      <span id="f1551">What would his principals think, if they could see him? </span>
      <span id="f1552">What if they knew his tragic and deceitful errand?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1553">From these reflections he was aroused by the entrance of the alien with the brandies and sodas. </span>
      <span id="f1554">Michael took one and bade the waiter pass the other to his friend.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1555">Pitman waved it from him with his hand. </span>
      <span id="f1556">‘Don’t let me lose all self-respect,’ he said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1557">‘Anything to oblige a friend,’ returned Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1558">‘But I’m not going to drink alone. </span>
      <span id="f1559">Here,’ he added to the waiter, ‘you take it.’ And, then, touching glasses, ‘The health of Mr Gideon Forsyth,’ said he.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1560">‘Meestare Gidden Borsye,’ replied the waiter, and he tossed off the liquor in four gulps.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1561">‘Have another?’ said Michael, with undisguised interest. </span>
      <span id="f1562">‘I never saw a man drink faster. </span>
      <span id="f1563">It restores one’s confidence in the human race.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1564">But the waiter excused himself politely, and, assisted by some one from without, began to bring in lunch.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1565">Michael made an excellent meal, which he washed down with a bottle of Heidsieck’s dry monopole. </span>
      <span id="f1566">As for the artist, he was far too uneasy to eat, and his companion flatly refused to let him share in the champagne unless he did.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1567">‘One of us must stay sober,’ remarked the lawyer, ‘and I won’t give you champagne on the strength of a leg of grouse. </span>
      <span id="f1568">I have to be cautious,’ he added confidentially. </span>
      <span id="f1569">‘One drunken man, excellent business--two drunken men, all my eye.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1570">On the production of coffee and departure of the waiter, Michael might have been observed to make portentous efforts after gravity of mien. </span>
      <span id="f1571">He looked his friend in the face (one eye perhaps a trifle off), and addressed him thickly but severely.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1572">‘Enough of this fooling,’ was his not inappropriate exordium. </span>
      <span id="f1573">‘To business. </span>
      <span id="f1574">Mark me closely. </span>
      <span id="f1575">I am an Australian. </span>
      <span id="f1576">My name is John Dickson, though you mightn’t think it from my unassuming appearance. </span>
      <span id="f1577">You will be relieved to hear that I am rich, sir, very rich. </span>
      <span id="f1578">You can’t go into this sort of thing too thoroughly, Pitman; the whole secret is preparation, and I can get up my biography from the beginning, and I could tell it you now, only I have forgotten it.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1579">‘Perhaps I’m stupid--’ began Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1580">‘That’s it!’ cried Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1581">‘Very stupid; but rich too--richer than I am. </span>
      <span id="f1582">I thought you would enjoy it, Pitman, so I’ve arranged that you were to be literally wallowing in wealth. </span>
      <span id="f1583">But then, on the other hand, you’re only an American, and a maker of india-rubber overshoes at that. </span>
      <span id="f1584">And the worst of it is--why should I conceal it from you?--the worst of it is that you’re called Ezra Thomas. </span>
      <span id="f1585">Now,’ said Michael, with a really appalling seriousness of manner, ‘tell me who we are.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1586">The unfortunate little man was cross-examined till he knew these facts by heart.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1587">‘There!’ cried the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f1588">‘Our plans are laid. </span>
      <span id="f1589">Thoroughly consistent--that’s the great thing.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1590">‘But I don’t understand,’ objected Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1591">‘O, you’ll understand right enough when it comes to the point,’ said Michael, rising.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1592">‘There doesn’t seem any story to it,’ said the artist.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1593">‘We can invent one as we go along,’ returned the lawyer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1594">‘But I can’t invent,’ protested Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1595">‘I never could invent in all my life.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1596">‘You’ll find you’ll have to, my boy,’ was Michael’s easy comment, and he began calling for the waiter, with whom he at once resumed a sparkling conversation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1597">It was a downcast little man that followed him. </span>
      <span id="f1598">‘Of course he is very clever, but can I trust him in such a state?’ he asked himself. </span>
      <span id="f1599">And when they were once more in a hansom, he took heart of grace.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1600">‘Don’t you think,’ he faltered, ‘it would be wiser, considering all things, to put this business off?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1601">‘Put off till tomorrow what can be done today?’ cried Michael, with indignation. </span>
      <span id="f1602">‘Never heard of such a thing! </span>
      <span id="f1603">Cheer up, it’s all right, go in and win--there’s a lion-hearted Pitman!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1604">At Cannon Street they enquired for Mr Brown’s piano, which had duly arrived, drove thence to a neighbouring mews, where they contracted for a cart, and while that was being got ready, took shelter in the harness-room beside the stove. </span>
      <span id="f1605">Here the lawyer presently toppled against the wall and fell into a gentle slumber; so that Pitman found himself launched on his own resources in the midst of several staring loafers, such as love to spend unprofitable days about a stable. </span>
      <span id="f1606">‘Rough day, sir,’ observed one. </span>
      <span id="f1607">‘Do you go far?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1608">‘Yes, it’s a--rather a rough day,’ said the artist; and then, feeling that he must change the conversation, ‘My friend is an Australian; he is very impulsive,’ he added.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1609">‘An Australian?’ said another. </span>
      <span id="f1610">‘I’ve a brother myself in Melbourne. </span>
      <span id="f1611">Does your friend come from that way at all?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1612">‘No, not exactly,’ replied the artist, whose ideas of the geography of New Holland were a little scattered. </span>
      <span id="f1613">‘He lives immensely far inland, and is very rich.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1614">The loafers gazed with great respect upon the slumbering colonist.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1615">‘Well,’ remarked the second speaker, ‘it’s a mighty big place, is Australia. </span>
      <span id="f1616">Do you come from thereaway too?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1617">‘No, I do not,’ said Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1618">‘I do not, and I don’t want to,’ he added irritably. </span>
      <span id="f1619">And then, feeling some diversion needful, he fell upon Michael and shook him up.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1620">‘Hullo,’ said the lawyer, ‘what’s wrong?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1621">‘The cart is nearly ready,’ said Pitman sternly. </span>
      <span id="f1622">‘I will not allow you to sleep.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1623">‘All right--no offence, old man,’ replied Michael, yawning. </span>
      <span id="f1624">‘A little sleep never did anybody any harm; I feel comparatively sober now. </span>
      <span id="f1625">But what’s all the hurry?’ he added, looking round him glassily. </span>
      <span id="f1626">‘I don’t see the cart, and I’ve forgotten where we left the piano.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1627">What more the lawyer might have said, in the confidence of the moment, is with Pitman a matter of tremulous conjecture to this day; but by the most blessed circumstance the cart was then announced, and Michael must bend the forces of his mind to the more difficult task of rising.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1628">‘Of course you’ll drive,’ he remarked to his companion, as he clambered on the vehicle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1629">‘I drive!’ cried Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1630">‘I never did such a thing in my life. </span>
      <span id="f1631">I cannot drive.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1632">‘Very well,’ responded Michael with entire composure, ‘neither can I see. </span>
      <span id="f1633">But just as you like. </span>
      <span id="f1634">Anything to oblige a friend.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1635">A glimpse of the ostler’s darkening countenance decided Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1636">‘All right,’ he said desperately, ‘you drive. </span>
      <span id="f1637">I’ll tell you where to go.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1638">On Michael in the character of charioteer (since this is not intended to be a novel of adventure) it would be superfluous to dwell at length. </span>
      <span id="f1639">Pitman, as he sat holding on and gasping counsels, sole witness of this singular feat, knew not whether most to admire the driver’s valour or his undeserved good fortune. </span>
      <span id="f1640">But the latter at least prevailed, the cart reached Cannon Street without disaster; and Mr Brown’s piano was speedily and cleverly got on board.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1641">‘Well, sir,’ said the leading porter, smiling as he mentally reckoned up a handful of loose silver, ‘that’s a mortal heavy piano.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1642">‘It’s the richness of the tone,’ returned Michael, as he drove away.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1643">It was but a little distance in the rain, which now fell thick and quiet, to the neighbourhood of Mr Gideon Forsyth’s chambers in the Temple. </span>
      <span id="f1644">There, in a deserted by-street, Michael drew up the horses and gave them in charge to a blighted shoe-black; and the pair descending from the cart, whereon they had figured so incongruously, set forth on foot for the decisive scene of their adventure. </span>
      <span id="f1645">For the first time Michael displayed a shadow of uneasiness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1646">‘Are my whiskers right?’ he asked. </span>
      <span id="f1647">‘It would be the devil and all if I was spotted.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1648">‘They are perfectly in their place,’ returned Pitman, with scant attention. </span>
      <span id="f1649">‘But is my disguise equally effective? </span>
      <span id="f1650">There is nothing more likely than that I should meet some of my patrons.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1651">‘O, nobody could tell you without your beard,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1652">‘All you have to do is to remember to speak slow; you speak through your nose already.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1653">‘I only hope the young man won’t be at home,’ sighed Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1654">‘And I only hope he’ll be alone,’ returned the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f1655">‘It will save a precious sight of manoeuvring.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1656">And sure enough, when they had knocked at the door, Gideon admitted them in person to a room, warmed by a moderate fire, framed nearly to the roof in works connected with the bench of British Themis, and offering, except in one particular, eloquent testimony to the legal zeal of the proprietor. </span>
      <span id="f1657">The one particular was the chimney-piece, which displayed a varied assortment of pipes, tobacco, cigar-boxes, and yellow-backed French novels.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1658">‘Mr Forsyth, I believe?’ It was Michael who thus opened the engagement. </span>
      <span id="f1659">‘We have come to trouble you with a piece of business. </span>
      <span id="f1660">I fear it’s scarcely professional--’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1661">‘I am afraid I ought to be instructed through a solicitor,’ replied Gideon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1662">‘Well, well, you shall name your own, and the whole affair can be put on a more regular footing tomorrow,’ replied Michael, taking a chair and motioning Pitman to do the same. </span>
      <span id="f1663">‘But you see we didn’t know any solicitors; we did happen to know of you, and time presses.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1664">‘May I enquire, gentlemen,’ asked Gideon, ‘to whom it was I am indebted for a recommendation?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1665">‘You may enquire,’ returned the lawyer, with a foolish laugh; ‘but I was invited not to tell you--till the thing was done.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1666">‘My uncle, no doubt,’ was the barrister’s conclusion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1667">‘My name is John Dickson,’ continued Michael; ‘a pretty well-known name in Ballarat; and my friend here is Mr Ezra Thomas, of the United States of America, a wealthy manufacturer of india-rubber overshoes.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1668">‘Stop one moment till I make a note of that,’ said Gideon; any one might have supposed he was an old practitioner.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1669">‘Perhaps you wouldn’t mind my smoking a cigar?’ asked Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1670">He had pulled himself together for the entrance; now again there began to settle on his mind clouds of irresponsible humour and incipient slumber; and he hoped (as so many have hoped in the like case) that a cigar would clear him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1671">‘Oh, certainly,’ cried Gideon blandly. </span>
      <span id="f1672">‘Try one of mine; I can confidently recommend them.’ And he handed the box to his client.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1673">‘In case I don’t make myself perfectly clear,’ observed the Australian, ‘it’s perhaps best to tell you candidly that I’ve been lunching. </span>
      <span id="f1674">It’s a thing that may happen to any one.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1675">‘O, certainly,’ replied the affable barrister. </span>
      <span id="f1676">‘But please be under no sense of hurry. </span>
      <span id="f1677">I can give you,’ he added, thoughtfully consulting his watch--‘yes, I can give you the whole afternoon.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1678">‘The business that brings me here,’ resumed the Australian with gusto, ‘is devilish delicate, I can tell you. </span>
      <span id="f1679">My friend Mr Thomas, being an American of Portuguese extraction, unacquainted with our habits, and a wealthy manufacturer of Broadwood pianos--’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1680">‘Broadwood pianos?’ cried Gideon, with some surprise. </span>
      <span id="f1681">‘Dear me, do I understand Mr Thomas to be a member of the firm?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1682">‘O, pirated Broadwoods,’ returned Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1683">‘My friend’s the American Broadwood.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1684">‘But I understood you to say,’ objected Gideon, ‘I certainly have it so in my notes--that your friend was a manufacturer of india--rubber overshoes.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1685">‘I know it’s confusing at first,’ said the Australian, with a beaming smile. </span>
      <span id="f1686">‘But he--in short, he combines the two professions. </span>
      <span id="f1687">And many others besides--many, many, many others,’ repeated Mr Dickson, with drunken solemnity. </span>
      <span id="f1688">‘Mr Thomas’s cotton-mills are one of the sights of Tallahassee; Mr Thomas’s tobacco-mills are the pride of Richmond, Va.; in short, he’s one of my oldest friends, Mr Forsyth, and I lay his case before you with emotion.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1689">The barrister looked at Mr Thomas and was agreeably prepossessed by his open although nervous countenance, and the simplicity and timidity of his manner. </span>
      <span id="f1690">‘What a people are these Americans!’ he thought. </span>
      <span id="f1691">‘Look at this nervous, weedy, simple little bird in a lownecked shirt, and think of him wielding and directing interests so extended and seemingly incongruous! </span>
      <span id="f1692">‘But had we not better,’ he observed aloud, ‘had we not perhaps better approach the facts?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1693">‘Man of business, I perceive, sir!’ said the Australian. </span>
      <span id="f1694">‘Let’s approach the facts. </span>
      <span id="f1695">It’s a breach of promise case.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1696">The unhappy artist was so unprepared for this view of his position that he could scarce suppress a cry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1697">‘Dear me,’ said Gideon, ‘they are apt to be very troublesome. </span>
      <span id="f1698">Tell me everything about it,’ he added kindly; ‘if you require my assistance, conceal nothing.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1699">‘You tell him,’ said Michael, feeling, apparently, that he had done his share. </span>
      <span id="f1700">‘My friend will tell you all about it,’ he added to Gideon, with a yawn. </span>
      <span id="f1701">‘Excuse my closing my eyes a moment; I’ve been sitting up with a sick friend.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1702">Pitman gazed blankly about the room; rage and despair seethed in his innocent spirit; thoughts of flight, thoughts even of suicide, came and went before him; and still the barrister patiently waited, and still the artist groped in vain for any form of words, however insignificant.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1703">‘It’s a breach of promise case,’ he said at last, in a low voice. </span>
      <span id="f1704">‘I--I am threatened with a breach of promise case.’ Here, in desperate quest of inspiration, he made a clutch at his beard; his fingers closed upon the unfamiliar smoothness of a shaven chin; and with that, hope and courage (if such expressions could ever have been appropriate in the case of Pitman) conjointly fled. </span>
      <span id="f1705">He shook Michael roughly. </span>
      <span id="f1706">‘Wake up!’ he cried, with genuine irritation in his tones. </span>
      <span id="f1707">‘I cannot do it, and you know I can’t.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1708">‘You must excuse my friend,’ said Michael; ‘he’s no hand as a narrator of stirring incident. </span>
      <span id="f1709">The case is simple,’ he went on. </span>
      <span id="f1710">‘My friend is a man of very strong passions, and accustomed to a simple, patriarchal style of life. </span>
      <span id="f1711">You see the thing from here: unfortunate visit to Europe, followed by unfortunate acquaintance with sham foreign count, who has a lovely daughter. </span>
      <span id="f1712">Mr Thomas was quite carried away; he proposed, he was accepted, and he wrote--wrote in a style which I am sure he must regret today. </span>
      <span id="f1713">If these letters are produced in court, sir, Mr Thomas’s character is gone.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1714">‘Am I to understand--’ began Gideon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1715">‘My dear sir,’ said the Australian emphatically, ‘it isn’t possible to understand unless you saw them.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1716">‘That is a painful circumstance,’ said Gideon; he glanced pityingly in the direction of the culprit, and, observing on his countenance every mark of confusion, pityingly withdrew his eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1717">‘And that would be nothing,’ continued Mr Dickson sternly, ‘but I wish--I wish from my heart, sir, I could say that Mr Thomas’s hands were clean. </span>
      <span id="f1718">He has no excuse; for he was engaged at the time--and is still engaged--to the belle of Constantinople, Ga. </span>
      <span id="f1719">My friend’s conduct was unworthy of the brutes that perish.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1720">‘Ga.?’ repeated Gideon enquiringly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1721">‘A contraction in current use,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1722">‘Ga. </span>
      <span id="f1723">for Georgia, in The same way as Co. </span>
      <span id="f1724">for Company.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1725">‘I was aware it was sometimes so written,’ returned the barrister, ‘but not that it was so pronounced.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1726">‘Fact, I assure you,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1727">‘You now see for yourself, sir, that if this unhappy person is to be saved, some devilish sharp practice will be needed. </span>
      <span id="f1728">There’s money, and no desire to spare it. </span>
      <span id="f1729">Mr Thomas could write a cheque tomorrow for a hundred thousand. </span>
      <span id="f1730">And, Mr Forsyth, there’s better than money. </span>
      <span id="f1731">The foreign count--Count Tarnow, he calls himself--was formerly a tobacconist in Bayswater, and passed under the humble but expressive name of Schmidt; his daughter--if she is his daughter--there’s another point--make a note of that, Mr Forsyth--his daughter at that time actually served in the shop--and she now proposes to marry a man of the eminence of Mr Thomas! </span>
      <span id="f1732">Now do you see our game? </span>
      <span id="f1733">We know they contemplate a move; and we wish to forestall ‘em. </span>
      <span id="f1734">Down you go to Hampton Court, where they live, and threaten, or bribe, or both, until you get the letters; if you can’t, God help us, we must go to court and Thomas must be exposed. </span>
      <span id="f1735">I’ll be done with him for one,’ added the unchivalrous friend.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1736">‘There seem some elements of success,’ said Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f1737">‘Was Schmidt at all known to the police?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1738">‘We hope so,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1739">‘We have every ground to think so. </span>
      <span id="f1740">Mark the neighbourhood--Bayswater! </span>
      <span id="f1741">Doesn’t Bayswater occur to you as very suggestive?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1742">For perhaps the sixth time during this remarkable interview, Gideon wondered if he were not becoming light-headed. </span>
      <span id="f1743">‘I suppose it’s just because he has been lunching,’ he thought; and then added aloud, ‘To what figure may I go?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1744">‘Perhaps five thousand would be enough for today,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1745">‘And now, sir, do not let me detain you any longer; the afternoon wears on; there are plenty of trains to Hampton Court; and I needn’t try to describe to you the impatience of my friend. </span>
      <span id="f1746">Here is a five-pound note for current expenses; and here is the address.’ And Michael began to write, paused, tore up the paper, and put the pieces in his pocket. </span>
      <span id="f1747">‘I will dictate,’ he said, ‘my writing is so uncertain.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1748">Gideon took down the address, ‘Count Tarnow, Kurnaul Villa, Hampton Court.’ Then he wrote something else on a sheet of paper. </span>
      <span id="f1749">‘You said you had not chosen a solicitor,’ he said. </span>
      <span id="f1750">‘For a case of this sort, here is the best man in London.’ And he handed the paper to Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1751">‘God bless me!’ ejaculated Michael, as he read his own address.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1752">‘O, I daresay you have seen his name connected with some rather painful cases,’ said Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f1753">‘But he is himself a perfectly honest man, and his capacity is recognized. </span>
      <span id="f1754">And now, gentlemen, it only remains for me to ask where I shall communicate with you.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1755">‘The Langham, of course,’ returned Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1756">‘Till tonight.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1757">‘Till tonight,’ replied Gideon, smiling. </span>
      <span id="f1758">‘I suppose I may knock you up at a late hour?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1759">‘Any hour, any hour,’ cried the vanishing solicitor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1760">‘Now there’s a young fellow with a head upon his shoulders,’ he said to Pitman, as soon as they were in the street.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1761">Pitman was indistinctly heard to murmur, ‘Perfect fool.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1762">‘Not a bit of him,’ returned Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1763">‘He knows who’s the best solicitor in London, and it’s not every man can say the same. </span>
      <span id="f1764">But, I say, didn’t I pitch it in hot?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1765">Pitman returned no answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1766">‘Hullo!’ said the lawyer, pausing, ‘what’s wrong with the long-suffering Pitman?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1767">‘You had no right to speak of me as you did,’ the artist broke out; ‘your language was perfectly unjustifiable; you have wounded me deeply.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1768">‘I never said a word about you,’ replied Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1769">‘I spoke of Ezra Thomas; and do please remember that there’s no such party.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1770">‘It’s just as hard to bear,’ said the artist.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1771">But by this time they had reached the corner of the by-street; and there was the faithful shoeblack, standing by the horses’ heads with a splendid assumption of dignity; and there was the piano, figuring forlorn upon the cart, while the rain beat upon its unprotected sides and trickled down its elegantly varnished legs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1772">The shoeblack was again put in requisition to bring five or six strong fellows from the neighbouring public-house; and the last battle of the campaign opened. </span>
      <span id="f1773">It is probable that Mr Gideon Forsyth had not yet taken his seat in the train for Hampton Court, before Michael opened the door of the chambers, and the grunting porters deposited the Broadwood grand in the middle of the floor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1774">‘And now,’ said the lawyer, after he had sent the men about their business, ‘one more precaution. </span>
      <span id="f1775">We must leave him the key of the piano, and we must contrive that he shall find it. </span>
      <span id="f1776">Let me see.’ And he built a square tower of cigars upon the top of the instrument, and dropped the key into the middle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1777">‘Poor young man,’ said the artist, as they descended the stairs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1778">‘He is in a devil of a position,’ assented Michael drily. </span>
      <span id="f1779">‘It’ll brace him up.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1780">‘And that reminds me,’ observed the excellent Pitman, ‘that I fear I displayed a most ungrateful temper. </span>
      <span id="f1781">I had no right, I see, to resent expressions, wounding as they were, which were in no sense directed.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1782">‘That’s all right,’ cried Michael, getting on the cart. </span>
      <span id="f1783">‘Not a word more, Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1784">Very proper feeling on your part; no man of self-respect can stand by and hear his alias insulted.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1785">The rain had now ceased, Michael was fairly sober, the body had been disposed of, and the friends were reconciled. </span>
      <span id="f1786">The return to the mews was therefore (in comparison with previous stages of the day’s adventures) quite a holiday outing; and when they had returned the cart and walked forth again from the stable-yard, unchallenged, and even unsuspected, Pitman drew a deep breath of joy. </span>
      <span id="f1787">‘And now,’ he said, ‘we can go home.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1788">‘Pitman,’ said the lawyer, stopping short, ‘your recklessness fills me with concern. </span>
      <span id="f1789">What! </span>
      <span id="f1790">we have been wet through the greater part of the day, and you propose, in cold blood, to go home! </span>
      <span id="f1791">No, sir--hot Scotch.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1792">And taking his friend’s arm he led him sternly towards the nearest public-house. </span>
      <span id="f1793">Nor was Pitman (I regret to say) wholly unwilling. </span>
      <span id="f1794">Now that peace was restored and the body gone, a certain innocent skittishness began to appear in the manners of the artist; and when he touched his steaming glass to Michael’s, he giggled aloud like a venturesome schoolgirl at a picnic.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>