<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1795">CHAPTER IX. Glorious Conclusion of Michael Finsbury’s Holiday</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1797">I know Michael Finsbury personally; my business--I know the awkwardness of having such a man for a lawyer--still it’s an old story now, and there is such a thing as gratitude, and, in short, my legal business, although now (I am thankful to say) of quite a placid character, remains entirely in Michael’s hands. </span>
      <span id="f1798">But the trouble is I have no natural talent for addresses; I learn one for every man--that is friendship’s offering; and the friend who subsequently changes his residence is dead to me, memory refusing to pursue him. </span>
      <span id="f1799">Thus it comes about that, as I always write to Michael at his office, I cannot swear to his number in the King’s Road. </span>
      <span id="f1800">Of course (like my neighbours), I have been to dinner there. </span>
      <span id="f1801">Of late years, since his accession to wealth, neglect of business, and election to the club, these little festivals have become common. </span>
      <span id="f1802">He picks up a few fellows in the smoking-room--all men of Attic wit--myself, for instance, if he has the luck to find me disengaged; a string of hansoms may be observed (by Her Majesty) bowling gaily through St James’s Park; and in a quarter of an hour the party surrounds one of the best appointed boards in London.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1803">But at the time of which we write the house in the King’s Road (let us still continue to call it No. </span>
      <span id="f1804">233) was kept very quiet; when Michael entertained guests it was at the halls of Nichol or Verrey that he would convene them, and the door of his private residence remained closed against his friends. </span>
      <span id="f1805">The upper storey, which was sunny, was set apart for his father; the drawing-room was never opened; the dining-room was the scene of Michael’s life. </span>
      <span id="f1806">It is in this pleasant apartment, sheltered from the curiosity of King’s Road by wire blinds, and entirely surrounded by the lawyer’s unrivalled library of poetry and criminal trials, that we find him sitting down to his dinner after his holiday with Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f1807">A spare old lady, with very bright eyes and a mouth humorously compressed, waited upon the lawyer’s needs; in every line of her countenance she betrayed the fact that she was an old retainer; in every word that fell from her lips she flaunted the glorious circumstance of a Scottish origin; and the fear with which this powerful combination fills the boldest was obviously no stranger to the bosom of our friend. </span>
      <span id="f1808">The hot Scotch having somewhat warmed up the embers of the Heidsieck. </span>
      <span id="f1809">It was touching to observe the master’s eagerness to pull himself together under the servant’s eye; and when he remarked, ‘I think, Teena, I’ll take a brandy and soda,’ he spoke like a man doubtful of his elocution, and not half certain of obedience.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1810">‘No such a thing, Mr Michael,’ was the prompt return. </span>
      <span id="f1811">‘Clar’t and water.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1812">‘Well, well, Teena, I daresay you know best,’ said the master. </span>
      <span id="f1813">‘Very fatiguing day at the office, though.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1814">‘What?’ said the retainer, ‘ye never were near the office!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1815">‘O yes, I was though; I was repeatedly along Fleet Street,’ returned Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1816">‘Pretty pliskies ye’ve been at this day!’ cried the old lady, with humorous alacrity; and then, ‘Take care--don’t break my crystal!’ she cried, as the lawyer came within an ace of knocking the glasses off the table.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1817">‘And how is he keeping?’ asked Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1818">‘O, just the same, Mr Michael, just the way he’ll be till the end, worthy man!’ was the reply. </span>
      <span id="f1819">‘But ye’ll not be the first that’s asked me that the day.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1820">‘No?’ said the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f1821">‘Who else?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1822">‘Ay, that’s a joke, too,’ said Teena grimly. </span>
      <span id="f1823">‘A friend of yours: Mr Morris.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1824">‘Morris! </span>
      <span id="f1825">What was the little beggar wanting here?’ enquired Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1826">‘Wantin’? </span>
      <span id="f1827">To see him,’ replied the housekeeper, completing her meaning by a movement of the thumb toward the upper storey. </span>
      <span id="f1828">‘That’s by his way of it; but I’ve an idee of my own. </span>
      <span id="f1829">He tried to bribe me, Mr Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1830">Bribe--me!’ she repeated, with inimitable scorn. </span>
      <span id="f1831">‘That’s no’ kind of a young gentleman.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1832">‘Did he so?’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1833">‘I bet he didn’t offer much.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1834">‘No more he did,’ replied Teena; nor could any subsequent questioning elicit from her the sum with which the thrifty leather merchant had attempted to corrupt her. </span>
      <span id="f1835">‘But I sent him about his business,’ she said gallantly. </span>
      <span id="f1836">‘He’ll not come here again in a hurry.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1837">‘He mustn’t see my father, you know; mind that!’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1838">‘I’m not going to have any public exhibition to a little beast like him.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1839">‘No fear of me lettin’ him,’ replied the trusty one. </span>
      <span id="f1840">‘But the joke is this, Mr Michael--see, ye’re upsettin’ the sauce, that’s a clean tablecloth--the best of the joke is that he thinks your father’s dead and you’re keepin’ it dark.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1841">Michael whistled. </span>
      <span id="f1842">‘Set a thief to catch a thief,’ said he.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1843">‘Exac’ly what I told him!’ cried the delighted dame.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1844">‘I’ll make him dance for that,’ said Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1845">‘Couldn’t ye get the law of him some way?’ suggested Teena truculently.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1846">‘No, I don’t think I could, and I’m quite sure I don’t want to,’ replied Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1847">‘But I say, Teena, I really don’t believe this claret’s wholesome; it’s not a sound, reliable wine. </span>
      <span id="f1848">Give us a brandy and soda, there’s a good soul.’ Teena’s face became like adamant. </span>
      <span id="f1849">‘Well, then,’ said the lawyer fretfully, ‘I won’t eat any more dinner.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1850">‘Ye can please yourself about that, Mr Michael,’ said Teena, and began composedly to take away.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1851">‘I do wish Teena wasn’t a faithful servant!’ sighed the lawyer, as he issued into Kings’s Road.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1852">The rain had ceased; the wind still blew, but only with a pleasant freshness; the town, in the clear darkness of the night, glittered with street-lamps and shone with glancing rain-pools. </span>
      <span id="f1853">‘Come, this is better,’ thought the lawyer to himself, and he walked on eastward, lending a pleased ear to the wheels and the million footfalls of the city.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1854">Near the end of the King’s Road he remembered his brandy and soda, and entered a flaunting public-house. </span>
      <span id="f1855">A good many persons were present, a waterman from a cab-stand, half a dozen of the chronically unemployed, a gentleman (in one corner) trying to sell aesthetic photographs out of a leather case to another and very youthful gentleman with a yellow goatee, and a pair of lovers debating some fine shade (in the other). </span>
      <span id="f1856">But the centre-piece and great attraction was a little old man, in a black, ready-made surtout, which was obviously a recent purchase. </span>
      <span id="f1857">On the marble table in front of him, beside a sandwich and a glass of beer, there lay a battered forage cap. </span>
      <span id="f1858">His hand fluttered abroad with oratorical gestures; his voice, naturally shrill, was plainly tuned to the pitch of the lecture room; and by arts, comparable to those of the Ancient Mariner, he was now holding spellbound the barmaid, the waterman, and four of the unemployed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1859">‘I have examined all the theatres in London,’ he was saying; ‘and pacing the principal entrances, I have ascertained them to be ridiculously disproportionate to the requirements of their audiences. </span>
      <span id="f1860">The doors opened the wrong way--I forget at this moment which it is, but have a note of it at home; they were frequently locked during the performance, and when the auditorium was literally thronged with English people. </span>
      <span id="f1861">You have probably not had my opportunities of comparing distant lands; but I can assure you this has been long ago recognized as a mark of aristocratic government. </span>
      <span id="f1862">Do you suppose, in a country really self-governed, such abuses could exist? </span>
      <span id="f1863">Your own intelligence, however uncultivated, tells you they could not. </span>
      <span id="f1864">Take Austria, a country even possibly more enslaved than England. </span>
      <span id="f1865">I have myself conversed with one of the survivors of the Ring Theatre, and though his colloquial German was not very good, I succeeded in gathering a pretty clear idea of his opinion of the case. </span>
      <span id="f1866">But, what will perhaps interest you still more, here is a cutting on the subject from a Vienna newspaper, which I will now read to you, translating as I go. </span>
      <span id="f1867">You can see for yourselves; it is printed in the German character.’ And he held the cutting out for verification, much as a conjuror passes a trick orange along the front bench.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1868">‘Hullo, old gentleman! </span>
      <span id="f1869">Is this you?’ said Michael, laying his hand upon the orator’s shoulder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1870">The figure turned with a convulsion of alarm, and showed the countenance of Mr Joseph Finsbury. </span>
      <span id="f1871">‘You, Michael!’ he cried. </span>
      <span id="f1872">‘There’s no one with you, is there?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1873">‘No,’ replied Michael, ordering a brandy and soda, ‘there’s nobody with me; whom do you expect?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1874">‘I thought of Morris or John,’ said the old gentleman, evidently greatly relieved.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1875">‘What the devil would I be doing with Morris or John?’ cried the nephew.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1876">‘There is something in that,’ returned Joseph. </span>
      <span id="f1877">‘And I believe I can trust you. </span>
      <span id="f1878">I believe you will stand by me.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1879">‘I hardly know what you mean,’ said the lawyer, ‘but if you are in need of money I am flush.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1880">‘It’s not that, my dear boy,’ said the uncle, shaking him by the hand. </span>
      <span id="f1881">‘I’ll tell you all about it afterwards.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1882">‘All right,’ responded the nephew. </span>
      <span id="f1883">‘I stand treat, Uncle Joseph; what will you have?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1884">‘In that case,’ replied the old gentleman, ‘I’ll take another sandwich. </span>
      <span id="f1885">I daresay I surprise you,’ he went on, ‘with my presence in a public-house; but the fact is, I act on a sound but little-known principle of my own--’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1886">‘O, it’s better known than you suppose,’ said Michael sipping his brandy and soda. </span>
      <span id="f1887">‘I always act on it myself when I want a drink.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1888">The old gentleman, who was anxious to propitiate Michael, laughed a cheerless laugh. </span>
      <span id="f1889">‘You have such a flow of spirits,’ said he, ‘I am sure I often find it quite amusing. </span>
      <span id="f1890">But regarding this principle of which I was about to speak. </span>
      <span id="f1891">It is that of accommodating one’s-self to the manners of any land (however humble) in which our lot may be cast. </span>
      <span id="f1892">Now, in France, for instance, every one goes to a cafe for his meals; in America, to what is called a “two-bit house”; in England the people resort to such an institution as the present for refreshment. </span>
      <span id="f1893">With sandwiches, tea, and an occasional glass of bitter beer, a man can live luxuriously in London for fourteen pounds twelve shillings per annum.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1894">‘Yes, I know,’ returned Michael, ‘but that’s not including clothes, washing, or boots. </span>
      <span id="f1895">The whole thing, with cigars and occasional sprees, costs me over seven hundred a year.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1896">But this was Michael’s last interruption. </span>
      <span id="f1897">He listened in good-humoured silence to the remainder of his uncle’s lecture, which speedily branched to political reform, thence to the theory of the weather-glass, with an illustrative account of a bora in the Adriatic; thence again to the best manner of teaching arithmetic to the deaf-and-dumb; and with that, the sandwich being then no more, explicuit valde feliciter. </span>
      <span id="f1898">A moment later the pair issued forth on the King’s Road.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1899">‘Michael,’ said his uncle, ‘the reason that I am here is because I cannot endure those nephews of mine. </span>
      <span id="f1900">I find them intolerable.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1901">‘I daresay you do,’ assented Michael, ‘I never could stand them for a moment.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1902">‘They wouldn’t let me speak,’ continued the old gentleman bitterly; ‘I never was allowed to get a word in edgewise; I was shut up at once with some impertinent remark. </span>
      <span id="f1903">They kept me on short allowance of pencils, when I wished to make notes of the most absorbing interest; the daily newspaper was guarded from me like a young baby from a gorilla. </span>
      <span id="f1904">Now, you know me, Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1905">I live for my calculations; I live for my manifold and ever-changing views of life; pens and paper and the productions of the popular press are to me as important as food and drink; and my life was growing quite intolerable when, in the confusion of that fortunate railway accident at Browndean, I made my escape. </span>
      <span id="f1906">They must think me dead, and are trying to deceive the world for the chance of the tontine.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1907">‘By the way, how do you stand for money?’ asked Michael kindly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1908">‘Pecuniarily speaking, I am rich,’ returned the old man with cheerfulness. </span>
      <span id="f1909">‘I am living at present at the rate of one hundred a year, with unlimited pens and paper; the British Museum at which to get books; and all the newspapers I choose to read. </span>
      <span id="f1910">But it’s extraordinary how little a man of intellectual interest requires to bother with books in a progressive age. </span>
      <span id="f1911">The newspapers supply all the conclusions.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1912">‘I’ll tell you what,’ said Michael, ‘come and stay with me.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1913">‘Michael,’ said the old gentleman, ‘it’s very kind of you, but you scarcely understand what a peculiar position I occupy. </span>
      <span id="f1914">There are some little financial complications; as a guardian, my efforts were not altogether blessed; and not to put too fine a point upon the matter, I am absolutely in the power of that vile fellow, Morris.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1915">‘You should be disguised,’ cried Michael eagerly; ‘I will lend you a pair of window-glass spectacles and some red side-whiskers.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1916">‘I had already canvassed that idea,’ replied the old gentleman, ‘but feared to awaken remark in my unpretentious lodgings. </span>
      <span id="f1917">The aristocracy, I am well aware--’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1918">‘But see here,’ interrupted Michael, ‘how do you come to have any money at all? </span>
      <span id="f1919">Don’t make a stranger of me, Uncle Joseph; I know all about the trust, and the hash you made of it, and the assignment you were forced to make to Morris.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1920">Joseph narrated his dealings with the bank.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1921">‘O, but I say, this won’t do,’ cried the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f1922">‘You’ve put your foot in it. </span>
      <span id="f1923">You had no right to do what you did.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1924">‘The whole thing is mine, Michael,’ protested the old gentleman. </span>
      <span id="f1925">‘I founded and nursed that business on principles entirely of my own.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1926">‘That’s all very fine,’ said the lawyer; ‘but you made an assignment, you were forced to make it, too; even then your position was extremely shaky; but now, my dear sir, it means the dock.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1927">‘It isn’t possible,’ cried Joseph; ‘the law cannot be so unjust as that?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1928">‘And the cream of the thing,’ interrupted Michael, with a sudden shout of laughter, ‘the cream of the thing is this, that of course you’ve downed the leather business! </span>
      <span id="f1929">I must say, Uncle Joseph, you have strange ideas of law, but I like your taste in humour.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1930">‘I see nothing to laugh at,’ observed Mr Finsbury tartly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1931">‘And talking of that, has Morris any power to sign for the firm?’ asked Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1932">‘No one but myself,’ replied Joseph.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1933">‘Poor devil of a Morris! </span>
      <span id="f1934">O, poor devil of a Morris!’ cried the lawyer in delight. </span>
      <span id="f1935">‘And his keeping up the farce that you’re at home! </span>
      <span id="f1936">O, Morris, the Lord has delivered you into my hands! </span>
      <span id="f1937">Let me see, Uncle Joseph, what do you suppose the leather business worth?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1938">‘It was worth a hundred thousand,’ said Joseph bitterly, ‘when it was in my hands. </span>
      <span id="f1939">But then there came a Scotsman--it is supposed he had a certain talent--it was entirely directed to bookkeeping--no accountant in London could understand a word of any of his books; and then there was Morris, who is perfectly incompetent. </span>
      <span id="f1940">And now it is worth very little. </span>
      <span id="f1941">Morris tried to sell it last year; and Pogram and Jarris offered only four thousand.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1942">‘I shall turn my attention to leather,’ said Michael with decision.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1943">‘You?’ asked Joseph. </span>
      <span id="f1944">‘I advise you not. </span>
      <span id="f1945">There is nothing in the whole field of commerce more surprising than the fluctuations of the leather market. </span>
      <span id="f1946">Its sensitiveness may be described as morbid.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1947">‘And now, Uncle Joseph, what have you done with all that money?’ asked the lawyer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1948">‘Paid it into a bank and drew twenty pounds,’ answered Mr Finsbury promptly. </span>
      <span id="f1949">‘Why?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1950">‘Very well,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1951">‘Tomorrow I shall send down a clerk with a cheque for a hundred, and he’ll draw out the original sum and return it to the Anglo-Patagonian, with some sort of explanation which I will try to invent for you. </span>
      <span id="f1952">That will clear your feet, and as Morris can’t touch a penny of it without forgery, it will do no harm to my little scheme.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1953">‘But what am I to do?’ asked Joseph; ‘I cannot live upon nothing.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1954">‘Don’t you hear?’ returned Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1955">‘I send you a cheque for a hundred; which leaves you eighty to go along upon; and when that’s done, apply to me again.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1956">‘I would rather not be beholden to your bounty all the same,’ said Joseph, biting at his white moustache. </span>
      <span id="f1957">‘I would rather live on my own money, since I have it.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1958">Michael grasped his arm. </span>
      <span id="f1959">‘Will nothing make you believe,’ he cried, ‘that I am trying to save you from Dartmoor?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1960">His earnestness staggered the old man. </span>
      <span id="f1961">‘I must turn my attention to law,’ he said; ‘it will be a new field; for though, of course, I understand its general principles, I have never really applied my mind to the details, and this view of yours, for example, comes on me entirely by surprise. </span>
      <span id="f1962">But you may be right, and of course at my time of life--for I am no longer young--any really long term of imprisonment would be highly prejudicial. </span>
      <span id="f1963">But, my dear nephew, I have no claim on you; you have no call to support me.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1964">‘That’s all right,’ said Michael; ‘I’ll probably get it out of the leather business.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1965">And having taken down the old gentleman’s address, Michael left him at the corner of a street.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1966">‘What a wonderful old muddler!’ he reflected, ‘and what a singular thing is life! </span>
      <span id="f1967">I seem to be condemned to be the instrument of Providence. </span>
      <span id="f1968">Let me see; what have I done today? </span>
      <span id="f1969">Disposed of a dead body, saved Pitman, saved my Uncle Joseph, brightened up Forsyth, and drunk a devil of a lot of most indifferent liquor. </span>
      <span id="f1970">Let’s top off with a visit to my cousins, and be the instrument of Providence in earnest. </span>
      <span id="f1971">Tomorrow I can turn my attention to leather; tonight I’ll just make it lively for ‘em in a friendly spirit.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1972">About a quarter of an hour later, as the clocks were striking eleven, the instrument of Providence descended from a hansom, and, bidding the driver wait, rapped at the door of No. </span>
      <span id="f1973">16 John Street.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1974">It was promptly opened by Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1975">‘O, it’s you, Michael,’ he said, carefully blocking up the narrow opening: ‘it’s very late.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1976">Michael without a word reached forth, grasped Morris warmly by the hand, and gave it so extreme a squeeze that the sullen householder fell back. </span>
      <span id="f1977">Profiting by this movement, the lawyer obtained a footing in the lobby and marched into the dining-room, with Morris at his heels.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1978">‘Where’s my Uncle Joseph?’ demanded Michael, sitting down in the most comfortable chair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1979">‘He’s not been very well lately,’ replied Morris; ‘he’s staying at Browndean; John is nursing him; and I am alone, as you see.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1980">Michael smiled to himself. </span>
      <span id="f1981">‘I want to see him on particular business,’ he said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1982">‘You can’t expect to see my uncle when you won’t let me see your father,’ returned Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1983">‘Fiddlestick,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1984">‘My father is my father; but Joseph is just as much my uncle as he’s yours; and you have no right to sequestrate his person.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1985">‘I do no such thing,’ said Morris doggedly. </span>
      <span id="f1986">‘He is not well, he is dangerously ill and nobody can see him.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1987">‘I’ll tell you what, then,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1988">‘I’ll make a clean breast of it. </span>
      <span id="f1989">I have come down like the opossum, Morris; I have come to compromise.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1990">Poor Morris turned as pale as death, and then a flush of wrath against the injustice of man’s destiny dyed his very temples. </span>
      <span id="f1991">‘What do you mean?’ he cried, ‘I don’t believe a word of it.’ And when Michael had assured him of his seriousness, ‘Well, then,’ he cried, with another deep flush, ‘I won’t; so you can put that in your pipe and smoke it.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1992">‘Oho!’ said Michael queerly. </span>
      <span id="f1993">‘You say your uncle is dangerously ill, and you won’t compromise? </span>
      <span id="f1994">There’s something very fishy about that.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1995">‘What do you mean?’ cried Morris hoarsely.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1996">‘I only say it’s fishy,’ returned Michael, ‘that is, pertaining to the finny tribe.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1997">‘Do you mean to insinuate anything?’ cried Morris stormily, trying the high hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1998">‘Insinuate?’ repeated Michael. </span>
      <span id="f1999">‘O, don’t let’s begin to use awkward expressions! </span>
      <span id="f2000">Let us drown our differences in a bottle, like two affable kinsmen. </span>
      <span id="f2001">The Two Affable Kinsmen, sometimes attributed to Shakespeare,’ he added.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2002">Morris’s mind was labouring like a mill. </span>
      <span id="f2003">‘Does he suspect? </span>
      <span id="f2004">or is this chance and stuff? </span>
      <span id="f2005">Should I soap, or should I bully? </span>
      <span id="f2006">Soap,’ he concluded. </span>
      <span id="f2007">‘It gains time.’ ‘Well,’ said he aloud, and with rather a painful affectation of heartiness, ‘it’s long since we have had an evening together, Michael; and though my habits (as you know) are very temperate, I may as well make an exception. </span>
      <span id="f2008">Excuse me one moment till I fetch a bottle of whisky from the cellar.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2009">‘No whisky for me,’ said Michael; ‘a little of the old still champagne or nothing.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2010">For a moment Morris stood irresolute, for the wine was very valuable: the next he had quitted the room without a word. </span>
      <span id="f2011">His quick mind had perceived his advantage; in thus dunning him for the cream of the cellar, Michael was playing into his hand. </span>
      <span id="f2012">‘One bottle?’ he thought. </span>
      <span id="f2013">‘By George, I’ll give him two! </span>
      <span id="f2014">this is no moment for economy; and once the beast is drunk, it’s strange if I don’t wring his secret out of him.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2015">With two bottles, accordingly, he returned. </span>
      <span id="f2016">Glasses were produced, and Morris filled them with hospitable grace.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2017">‘I drink to you, cousin!’ he cried gaily. </span>
      <span id="f2018">‘Don’t spare the wine-cup in my house.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2019">Michael drank his glass deliberately, standing at the table; filled it again, and returned to his chair, carrying the bottle along with him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2020">‘The spoils of war!’ he said apologetically. </span>
      <span id="f2021">‘The weakest goes to the wall. </span>
      <span id="f2022">Science, Morris, science.’ Morris could think of no reply, and for an appreciable interval silence reigned. </span>
      <span id="f2023">But two glasses of the still champagne produced a rapid change in Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2024">‘There’s a want of vivacity about you, Morris,’ he observed. </span>
      <span id="f2025">‘You may be deep; but I’ll be hanged if you’re vivacious!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2026">‘What makes you think me deep?’ asked Morris with an air of pleased simplicity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2027">‘Because you won’t compromise,’ said the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f2028">‘You’re deep dog, Morris, very deep dog, not t’ compromise--remarkable deep dog. </span>
      <span id="f2029">And a very good glass of wine; it’s the only respectable feature in the Finsbury family, this wine; rarer thing than a title--much rarer. </span>
      <span id="f2030">Now a man with glass wine like this in cellar, I wonder why won’t compromise?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2031">‘Well, YOU wouldn’t compromise before, you know,’ said the smiling Morris. </span>
      <span id="f2032">‘Turn about is fair play.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2033">‘I wonder why _I_ wouldn’ compromise? </span>
      <span id="f2034">I wonder why YOU wouldn’?’ enquired Michael. </span>
      <span id="f2035">‘I wonder why we each think the other wouldn’? </span>
      <span id="f2036">‘S quite a remarrable--remarkable problem,’ he added, triumphing over oral obstacles, not without obvious pride. </span>
      <span id="f2037">‘Wonder what we each think--don’t you?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2038">‘What do you suppose to have been my reason?’ asked Morris adroitly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2039">Michael looked at him and winked. </span>
      <span id="f2040">‘That’s cool,’ said he. </span>
      <span id="f2041">‘Next thing, you’ll ask me to help you out of the muddle. </span>
      <span id="f2042">I know I’m emissary of Providence, but not that kind! </span>
      <span id="f2043">You get out of it yourself, like Aesop and the other fellow. </span>
      <span id="f2044">Must be dreadful muddle for young orphan o’ forty; leather business and all!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2045">‘I am sure I don’t know what you mean,’ said Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2046">‘Not sure I know myself,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f2047">‘This is exc’lent vintage, sir--exc’lent vintage. </span>
      <span id="f2048">Nothing against the tipple. </span>
      <span id="f2049">Only thing: here’s a valuable uncle disappeared. </span>
      <span id="f2050">Now, what I want to know: where’s valuable uncle?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2051">‘I have told you: he is at Browndean,’ answered Morris, furtively wiping his brow, for these repeated hints began to tell upon him cruelly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2052">‘Very easy say Brown--Browndee--no’ so easy after all!’ cried Michael. </span>
      <span id="f2053">‘Easy say; anything’s easy say, when you can say it. </span>
      <span id="f2054">What I don’ like’s total disappearance of an uncle. </span>
      <span id="f2055">Not businesslike.’ And he wagged his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2056">‘It is all perfectly simple,’ returned Morris, with laborious calm. </span>
      <span id="f2057">‘There is no mystery. </span>
      <span id="f2058">He stays at Browndean, where he got a shake in the accident.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2059">‘Ah!’ said Michael, ‘got devil of a shake!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2060">‘Why do you say that?’ cried Morris sharply.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2061">‘Best possible authority. </span>
      <span id="f2062">Told me so yourself,’ said the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f2063">‘But if you tell me contrary now, of course I’m bound to believe either the one story or the other. </span>
      <span id="f2064">Point is I’ve upset this bottle, still champagne’s exc’lent thing carpet--point is, is valuable uncle dead--an’--bury?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2065">Morris sprang from his seat. </span>
      <span id="f2066">‘What’s that you say?’ he gasped.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2067">‘I say it’s exc’lent thing carpet,’ replied Michael, rising. </span>
      <span id="f2068">‘Exc’lent thing promote healthy action of the skin. </span>
      <span id="f2069">Well, it’s all one, anyway. </span>
      <span id="f2070">Give my love to Uncle Champagne.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2071">‘You’re not going away?’ said Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2072">‘Awf’ly sorry, ole man. </span>
      <span id="f2073">Got to sit up sick friend,’ said the wavering Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2074">‘You shall not go till you have explained your hints,’ returned Morris fiercely. </span>
      <span id="f2075">‘What do you mean? </span>
      <span id="f2076">What brought you here?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2077">‘No offence, I trust,’ said the lawyer, turning round as he opened the door; ‘only doing my duty as shemishery of Providence.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2078">Groping his way to the front-door, he opened it with some difficulty, and descended the steps to the hansom. </span>
      <span id="f2079">The tired driver looked up as he approached, and asked where he was to go next.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2080">Michael observed that Morris had followed him to the steps; a brilliant inspiration came to him. </span>
      <span id="f2081">‘Anything t’ give pain,’ he reflected. </span>
      <span id="f2082">. </span>
      <span id="f2083">. </span>
      <span id="f2084">. </span>
      <span id="f2085">‘Drive Shcotlan’ Yard,’ he added aloud, holding to the wheel to steady himself; ‘there’s something devilish fishy, cabby, about those cousins. </span>
      <span id="f2086">Mush’ be cleared up! </span>
      <span id="f2087">Drive Shcotlan’ Yard.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2088">‘You don’t mean that, sir,’ said the man, with the ready sympathy of the lower orders for an intoxicated gentleman. </span>
      <span id="f2089">‘I had better take you home, sir; you can go to Scotland Yard tomorrow.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2090">‘Is it as friend or as perfessional man you advise me not to go Shcotlan’ Yard t’night?’ enquired Michael. </span>
      <span id="f2091">‘All righ’, never min’ Shcotlan’ Yard, drive Gaiety bar.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2092">‘The Gaiety bar is closed,’ said the man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2093">‘Then home,’ said Michael, with the same cheerfulness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2094">‘Where to, sir?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2095">‘I don’t remember, I’m sure,’ said Michael, entering the vehicle, ‘drive Shcotlan’ Yard and ask.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2096">‘But you’ll have a card,’ said the man, through the little aperture in the top, ‘give me your card-case.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2097">‘What imagi--imagination in a cabby!’ cried the lawyer, producing his card-case, and handing it to the driver.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2098">The man read it by the light of the lamp. </span>
      <span id="f2099">‘Mr Michael Finsbury, 233 King’s Road, Chelsea. </span>
      <span id="f2100">Is that it, sir?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2101">‘Right you are,’ cried Michael, ‘drive there if you can see way.’</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>