<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f2573">CHAPTER XII. Positively the Last Appearance of the Broadwood Grand</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f2575">England is supposed to be unmusical; but without dwelling on the patronage extended to the organ-grinder, without seeking to found any argument on the prevalence of the jew’s trump, there is surely one instrument that may be said to be national in the fullest acceptance of the word. </span>
      <span id="f2576">The herdboy in the broom, already musical in the days of Father Chaucer, startles (and perhaps pains) the lark with this exiguous pipe; and in the hands of the skilled bricklayer,</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2577">‘The thing becomes a trumpet, whence he blows’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2578">(as a general rule) either ‘The British Grenadiers’ or ‘Cherry Ripe’. </span>
      <span id="f2579">The latter air is indeed the shibboleth and diploma piece of the penny whistler; I hazard a guess it was originally composed for this instrument. </span>
      <span id="f2580">It is singular enough that a man should be able to gain a livelihood, or even to tide over a period of unemployment, by the display of his proficiency upon the penny whistle; still more so, that the professional should almost invariably confine himself to ‘Cherry Ripe’. </span>
      <span id="f2581">But indeed, singularities surround the subject, thick like blackberries. </span>
      <span id="f2582">Why, for instance, should the pipe be called a penny whistle? </span>
      <span id="f2583">I think no one ever bought it for a penny. </span>
      <span id="f2584">Why should the alternative name be tin whistle? </span>
      <span id="f2585">I am grossly deceived if it be made of tin. </span>
      <span id="f2586">Lastly, in what deaf catacomb, in what earless desert, does the beginner pass the excruciating interval of his apprenticeship? </span>
      <span id="f2587">We have all heard people learning the piano, the fiddle, and the cornet; but the young of the penny whistler (like that of the salmon) is occult from observation; he is never heard until proficient; and providence (perhaps alarmed by the works of Mr Mallock) defends human hearing from his first attempts upon the upper octave.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2588">A really noteworthy thing was taking place in a green lane, not far from Padwick. </span>
      <span id="f2589">On the bench of a carrier’s cart there sat a tow-headed, lanky, modest-looking youth; the reins were on his lap; the whip lay behind him in the interior of the cart; the horse proceeded without guidance or encouragement; the carrier (or the carrier’s man), rapt into a higher sphere than that of his daily occupations, his looks dwelling on the skies, devoted himself wholly to a brand-new D penny whistle, whence he diffidently endeavoured to elicit that pleasing melody ‘The Ploughboy’. </span>
      <span id="f2590">To any observant person who should have chanced to saunter in that lane, the hour would have been thrilling. </span>
      <span id="f2591">‘Here at last,’ he would have said, ‘is the beginner.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2592">The tow-headed youth (whose name was Harker) had just encored himself for the nineteenth time, when he was struck into the extreme of confusion by the discovery that he was not alone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2593">‘There you have it!’ cried a manly voice from the side of the road.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2594">‘That’s as good as I want to hear. </span>
      <span id="f2595">Perhaps a leetle oilier in the run,’ the voice suggested, with meditative gusto. </span>
      <span id="f2596">‘Give it us again.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2597">Harker glanced, from the depths of his humiliation, at the speaker. </span>
      <span id="f2598">He beheld a powerful, sun-brown, clean-shaven fellow, about forty years of age, striding beside the cart with a non-commissioned military bearing, and (as he strode) spinning in the air a cane. </span>
      <span id="f2599">The fellow’s clothes were very bad, but he looked clean and self-reliant.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2600">‘I’m only a beginner,’ gasped the blushing Harker, ‘I didn’t think anybody could hear me.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2601">‘Well, I like that!’ returned the other. </span>
      <span id="f2602">‘You’re a pretty old beginner. </span>
      <span id="f2603">Come, I’ll give you a lead myself. </span>
      <span id="f2604">Give us a seat here beside you.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2605">The next moment the military gentleman was perched on the cart, pipe in hand. </span>
      <span id="f2606">He gave the instrument a knowing rattle on the shaft, mouthed it, appeared to commune for a moment with the muse, and dashed into ‘The girl I left behind me’. </span>
      <span id="f2607">He was a great, rather than a fine, performer; he lacked the bird-like richness; he could scarce have extracted all the honey out of ‘Cherry Ripe’; he did not fear--he even ostentatiously displayed and seemed to revel in he shrillness of the instrument; but in fire, speed, precision, evenness, and fluency; in linked agility of jimmy--a technical expression, by your leave, answering to warblers on the bagpipe; and perhaps, above all, in that inspiring side-glance of the eye, with which he followed the effect and (as by a human appeal) eked out the insufficiency of his performance: in these, the fellow stood without a rival. </span>
      <span id="f2608">Harker listened: ‘The girl I left behind me’ filled him with despair; ‘The Soldier’s Joy’ carried him beyond jealousy into generous enthusiasm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2609">‘Turn about,’ said the military gentleman, offering the pipe.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2610">‘O, not after you!’ cried Harker; ‘you’re a professional.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2611">‘No,’ said his companion; ‘an amatyure like yourself. </span>
      <span id="f2612">That’s one style of play, yours is the other, and I like it best. </span>
      <span id="f2613">But I began when I was a boy, you see, before my taste was formed. </span>
      <span id="f2614">When you’re my age you’ll play that thing like a cornet-a-piston. </span>
      <span id="f2615">Give us that air again; how does it go?’ and he affected to endeavour to recall ‘The Ploughboy’.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2616">A timid, insane hope sprang in the breast of Harker. </span>
      <span id="f2617">Was it possible? </span>
      <span id="f2618">Was there something in his playing? </span>
      <span id="f2619">It had, indeed, seemed to him at times as if he got a kind of a richness out of it. </span>
      <span id="f2620">Was he a genius? </span>
      <span id="f2621">Meantime the military gentleman stumbled over the air.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2622">‘No,’ said the unhappy Harker, ‘that’s not quite it. </span>
      <span id="f2623">It goes this way--just to show you.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2624">And, taking the pipe between his lips, he sealed his doom. </span>
      <span id="f2625">When he had played the air, and then a second time, and a third; when the military gentleman had tried it once more, and once more failed; when it became clear to Harker that he, the blushing debutant, was actually giving a lesson to this full-grown flutist--and the flutist under his care was not very brilliantly progressing--how am I to tell what floods of glory brightened the autumnal countryside; how, unless the reader were an amateur himself, describe the heights of idiotic vanity to which the carrier climbed? </span>
      <span id="f2626">One significant fact shall paint the situation: thenceforth it was Harker who played, and the military gentleman listened and approved.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2627">As he listened, however, he did not forget the habit of soldierly precaution, looking both behind and before. </span>
      <span id="f2628">He looked behind and computed the value of the carrier’s load, divining the contents of the brown-paper parcels and the portly hamper, and briefly setting down the grand piano in the brand-new piano-case as ‘difficult to get rid of’. </span>
      <span id="f2629">He looked before, and spied at the corner of the green lane a little country public-house embowered in roses. </span>
      <span id="f2630">‘I’ll have a shy at it,’ concluded the military gentleman, and roundly proposed a glass. </span>
      <span id="f2631">‘Well, I’m not a drinking man,’ said Harker.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2632">‘Look here, now,’ cut in the other, ‘I’ll tell you who I am: I’m Colour-Sergeant Brand of the Blankth. </span>
      <span id="f2633">That’ll tell you if I’m a drinking man or not.’ It might and it might not, thus a Greek chorus would have intervened, and gone on to point out how very far it fell short of telling why the sergeant was tramping a country lane in tatters; or even to argue that he must have pretermitted some while ago his labours for the general defence, and (in the interval) possibly turned his attention to oakum. </span>
      <span id="f2634">But there was no Greek chorus present; and the man of war went on to contend that drinking was one thing and a friendly glass another.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2635">In the Blue Lion, which was the name of the country public-house, Colour-Sergeant Brand introduced his new friend, Mr Harker, to a number of ingenious mixtures, calculated to prevent the approaches of intoxication. </span>
      <span id="f2636">These he explained to be ‘rekisite’ in the service, so that a self-respecting officer should always appear upon parade in a condition honourable to his corps. </span>
      <span id="f2637">The most efficacious of these devices was to lace a pint of mild ale with twopenceworth of London gin. </span>
      <span id="f2638">I am pleased to hand in this recipe to the discerning reader, who may find it useful even in civil station; for its effect upon Mr Harker was revolutionary. </span>
      <span id="f2639">He must be helped on board his own waggon, where he proceeded to display a spirit entirely given over to mirth and music, alternately hooting with laughter, to which the sergeant hastened to bear chorus, and incoherently tootling on the pipe. </span>
      <span id="f2640">The man of war, meantime, unostentatiously possessed himself of the reins. </span>
      <span id="f2641">It was plain he had a taste for the secluded beauties of an English landscape; for the cart, although it wandered under his guidance for some time, was never observed to issue on the dusty highway, journeying between hedge and ditch, and for the most part under overhanging boughs. </span>
      <span id="f2642">It was plain, besides, he had an eye to the true interests of Mr Harker; for though the cart drew up more than once at the doors of public-houses, it was only the sergeant who set foot to ground, and, being equipped himself with a quart bottle, once more proceeded on his rural drive.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2643">To give any idea of the complexity of the sergeant’s course, a map of that part of Middlesex would be required, and my publisher is averse from the expense. </span>
      <span id="f2644">Suffice it, that a little after the night had closed, the cart was brought to a standstill in a woody road; where the sergeant lifted from among the parcels, and tenderly deposited upon the wayside, the inanimate form of Harker.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2645">‘If you come-to before daylight,’ thought the sergeant, ‘I shall be surprised for one.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2646">From the various pockets of the slumbering carrier he gently collected the sum of seventeen shillings and eightpence sterling; and, getting once more into the cart, drove thoughtfully away.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2647">‘If I was exactly sure of where I was, it would be a good job,’ he reflected. </span>
      <span id="f2648">‘Anyway, here’s a corner.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2649">He turned it, and found himself upon the riverside. </span>
      <span id="f2650">A little above him the lights of a houseboat shone cheerfully; and already close at hand, so close that it was impossible to avoid their notice, three persons, a lady and two gentlemen, were deliberately drawing near. </span>
      <span id="f2651">The sergeant put his trust in the convenient darkness of the night, and drove on to meet them. </span>
      <span id="f2652">One of the gentlemen, who was of a portly figure, walked in the midst of the fairway, and presently held up a staff by way of signal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2653">‘My man, have you seen anything of a carrier’s cart?’ he cried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2654">Dark as it was, it seemed to the sergeant as though the slimmer of the two gentlemen had made a motion to prevent the other speaking, and (finding himself too late) had skipped aside with some alacrity. </span>
      <span id="f2655">At another season, Sergeant Brand would have paid more attention to the fact; but he was then immersed in the perils of his own predicament.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2656">‘A carrier’s cart?’ said he, with a perceptible uncertainty of voice. </span>
      <span id="f2657">‘No, sir.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2658">‘Ah!’ said the portly gentleman, and stood aside to let the sergeant pass. </span>
      <span id="f2659">The lady appeared to bend forward and study the cart with every mark of sharpened curiosity, the slimmer gentleman still keeping in the rear.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2660">‘I wonder what the devil they would be at,’ thought Sergeant Brand; and, looking fearfully back, he saw the trio standing together in the midst of the way, like folk consulting. </span>
      <span id="f2661">The bravest of military heroes are not always equal to themselves as to their reputation; and fear, on some singular provocation, will find a lodgment in the most unfamiliar bosom. </span>
      <span id="f2662">The word ‘detective’ might have been heard to gurgle in the sergeant’s throat; and vigorously applying the whip, he fled up the riverside road to Great Haverham, at the gallop of the carrier’s horse. </span>
      <span id="f2663">The lights of the houseboat flashed upon the flying waggon as it passed; the beat of hoofs and the rattle of the vehicle gradually coalesced and died away; and presently, to the trio on the riverside, silence had redescended.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2664">‘It’s the most extraordinary thing,’ cried the slimmer of the two gentlemen, ‘but that’s the cart.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2665">‘And I know I saw a piano,’ said the girl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2666">‘O, it’s the cart, certainly; and the extraordinary thing is, it’s not the man,’ added the first.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2667">‘It must be the man, Gid, it must be,’ said the portly one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2668">‘Well, then, why is he running away?’ asked Gideon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2669">‘His horse bolted, I suppose,’ said the Squirradical.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2670">‘Nonsense! </span>
      <span id="f2671">I heard the whip going like a flail,’ said Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f2672">‘It simply defies the human reason.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2673">‘I’ll tell you,’ broke in the girl, ‘he came round that corner. </span>
      <span id="f2674">Suppose we went and--what do you call it in books?--followed his trail? </span>
      <span id="f2675">There may be a house there, or somebody who saw him, or something.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2676">‘Well, suppose we did, for the fun of the thing,’ said Gideon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2677">The fun of the thing (it would appear) consisted in the extremely close juxtaposition of himself and Miss Hazeltine. </span>
      <span id="f2678">To Uncle Ned, who was excluded from these simple pleasures, the excursion appeared hopeless from the first; and when a fresh perspective of darkness opened up, dimly contained between park palings on the one side and a hedge and ditch upon the other, the whole without the smallest signal of human habitation, the Squirradical drew up.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2679">‘This is a wild-goose chase,’ said he.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2680">With the cessation of the footfalls, another sound smote upon their ears.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2681">‘O, what’s that?’ cried Julia.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2682">‘I can’t think,’ said Gideon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2683">The Squirradical had his stick presented like a sword. </span>
      <span id="f2684">‘Gid,’ he began, ‘Gid, I--’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2685">‘O Mr Forsyth!’ cried the girl. </span>
      <span id="f2686">‘O don’t go forward, you don’t know what it might be--it might be something perfectly horrid.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2687">‘It may be the devil itself,’ said Gideon, disengaging himself, ‘but I am going to see it.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2688">‘Don’t be rash, Gid,’ cried his uncle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2689">The barrister drew near to the sound, which was certainly of a portentous character. </span>
      <span id="f2690">In quality it appeared to blend the strains of the cow, the fog-horn, and the mosquito; and the startling manner of its enunciation added incalculably to its terrors. </span>
      <span id="f2691">A dark object, not unlike the human form divine, appeared on the brink of the ditch.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2692">‘It’s a man,’ said Gideon, ‘it’s only a man; he seems to be asleep and snoring. </span>
      <span id="f2693">Hullo,’ he added, a moment after, ‘there must be something wrong with him, he won’t waken.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2694">Gideon produced his vestas, struck one, and by its light recognized the tow head of Harker.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2695">‘This is the man,’ said he, ‘as drunk as Belial. </span>
      <span id="f2696">I see the whole story’; and to his two companions, who had now ventured to rejoin him, he set forth a theory of the divorce between the carrier and his cart, which was not unlike the truth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2697">‘Drunken brute!’ said Uncle Ned, ‘let’s get him to a pump and give him what he deserves.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2698">‘Not at all!’ said Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f2699">‘It is highly undesirable he should see us together; and really, do you know, I am very much obliged to him, for this is about the luckiest thing that could have possibly occurred. </span>
      <span id="f2700">It seems to me--Uncle Ned, I declare to heaven it seems to me--I’m clear of it!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2701">‘Clear of what?’ asked the Squirradical.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2702">‘The whole affair!’ cried Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f2703">‘That man has been ass enough to steal the cart and the dead body; what he hopes to do with it I neither know nor care. </span>
      <span id="f2704">My hands are free, Jimson ceases; down with Jimson. </span>
      <span id="f2705">Shake hands with me, Uncle Ned--Julia, darling girl, Julia, I--’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2706">‘Gideon, Gideon!’ said his uncle. </span>
      <span id="f2707">‘O, it’s all right, uncle, when we’re going to be married so soon,’ said Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f2708">‘You know you said so yourself in the houseboat.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2709">‘Did I?’ said Uncle Ned; ‘I am certain I said no such thing.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2710">‘Appeal to him, tell him he did, get on his soft side,’ cried Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f2711">‘He’s a real brick if you get on his soft side.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2712">‘Dear Mr Bloomfield,’ said Julia, ‘I know Gideon will be such a very good boy, and he has promised me to do such a lot of law, and I will see that he does too. </span>
      <span id="f2713">And you know it is so very steadying to young men, everybody admits that; though, of course, I know I have no money, Mr Bloomfield,’ she added.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2714">‘My dear young lady, as this rapscallion told you today on the boat, Uncle Ned has plenty,’ said the Squirradical, ‘and I can never forget that you have been shamefully defrauded. </span>
      <span id="f2715">So as there’s nobody looking, you had better give your Uncle Ned a kiss. </span>
      <span id="f2716">There, you rogue,’ resumed Mr Bloomfield, when the ceremony had been daintily performed, ‘this very pretty young lady is yours, and a vast deal more than you deserve. </span>
      <span id="f2717">But now, let us get back to the houseboat, get up steam on the launch, and away back to town.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2718">‘That’s the thing!’ cried Gideon; ‘and tomorrow there will be no houseboat, and no Jimson, and no carrier’s cart, and no piano; and when Harker awakes on the ditchside, he may tell himself the whole affair has been a dream.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2719">‘Aha!’ said Uncle Ned, ‘but there’s another man who will have a different awakening. </span>
      <span id="f2720">That fellow in the cart will find he has been too clever by half.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2721">‘Uncle Ned and Julia,’ said Gideon, ‘I am as happy as the King of Tartary, my heart is like a threepenny-bit, my heels are like feathers; I am out of all my troubles, Julia’s hand is in mine. </span>
      <span id="f2722">Is this a time for anything but handsome sentiments? </span>
      <span id="f2723">Why, there’s not room in me for anything that’s not angelic! </span>
      <span id="f2724">And when I think of that poor unhappy devil in the cart, I stand here in the night and cry with a single heart God help him!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2725">‘Amen,’ said Uncle Ned.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>