<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f2928">CHAPTER XIV. William Bent Pitman Hears of Something to his Advantage</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f2930">On the morning of Sunday, William Dent Pitman rose at his usual hour, although with something more than the usual reluctance. </span>
      <span id="f2931">The day before (it should be explained) an addition had been made to his family in the person of a lodger. </span>
      <span id="f2932">Michael Finsbury had acted sponsor in the business, and guaranteed the weekly bill; on the other hand, no doubt with a spice of his prevailing jocularity, he had drawn a depressing portrait of the lodger’s character. </span>
      <span id="f2933">Mr Pitman had been led to understand his guest was not good company; he had approached the gentleman with fear, and had rejoiced to find himself the entertainer of an angel. </span>
      <span id="f2934">At tea he had been vastly pleased; till hard on one in the morning he had sat entranced by eloquence and progressively fortified with information in the studio; and now, as he reviewed over his toilet the harmless pleasures of the evening, the future smiled upon him with revived attractions. </span>
      <span id="f2935">‘Mr Finsbury is indeed an acquisition,’ he remarked to himself; and as he entered the little parlour, where the table was already laid for breakfast, the cordiality of his greeting would have befitted an acquaintanceship already old.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2936">‘I am delighted to see you, sir’--these were his expressions--‘and I trust you have slept well.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2937">‘Accustomed as I have been for so long to a life of almost perpetual change,’ replied the guest, ‘the disturbance so often complained of by the more sedentary, as attending their first night in (what is called) a new bed, is a complaint from which I am entirely free.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2938">‘I am delighted to hear it,’ said the drawing-master warmly. </span>
      <span id="f2939">‘But I see I have interrupted you over the paper.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2940">‘The Sunday paper is one of the features of the age,’ said Mr Finsbury. </span>
      <span id="f2941">‘In America, I am told, it supersedes all other literature, the bone and sinew of the nation finding their requirements catered for; hundreds of columns will be occupied with interesting details of the world’s doings, such as water-spouts, elopements, conflagrations, and public entertainments; there is a corner for politics, ladies’ work, chess, religion, and even literature; and a few spicy editorials serve to direct the course of public thought. </span>
      <span id="f2942">It is difficult to estimate the part played by such enormous and miscellaneous repositories in the education of the people. </span>
      <span id="f2943">But this (though interesting in itself) partakes of the nature of a digression; and what I was about to ask you was this: Are you yourself a student of the daily press?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2944">‘There is not much in the papers to interest an artist,’ returned Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2945">‘In that case,’ resumed Joseph, ‘an advertisement which has appeared the last two days in various journals, and reappears this morning, may possibly have failed to catch your eye. </span>
      <span id="f2946">The name, with a trifling variation, bears a strong resemblance to your own. </span>
      <span id="f2947">Ah, here it is. </span>
      <span id="f2948">If you please, I will read it to you:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2949">WILIAM BENT PITMAN, if this should meet the eye of, he will hear of SOMETHING TO HIS ADVANTAGE at the far end of the main line departure platform, Waterloo Station, 2 to 4 P.M. </span>
      <span id="f2950">today.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2951">‘Is that in print?’ cried Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f2952">‘Let me see it! </span>
      <span id="f2953">Bent? </span>
      <span id="f2954">It must be Dent! </span>
      <span id="f2955">SOMETHING TO MY ADVANTAGE? </span>
      <span id="f2956">Mr Finsbury, excuse me offering a word of caution; I am aware how strangely this must sound in your ears, but there are domestic reasons why this little circumstance might perhaps be better kept between ourselves. </span>
      <span id="f2957">Mrs Pitman--my dear Sir, I assure you there is nothing dishonourable in my secrecy; the reasons are domestic, merely domestic; and I may set your conscience at rest when I assure you all the circumstances are known to our common friend, your excellent nephew, Mr Michael, who has not withdrawn from me his esteem.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2958">‘A word is enough, Mr Pitman,’ said Joseph, with one of his Oriental reverences.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2959">Half an hour later, the drawing-master found Michael in bed and reading a book, the picture of good-humour and repose.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2960">‘Hillo, Pitman,’ he said, laying down his book, ‘what brings you here at this inclement hour? </span>
      <span id="f2961">Ought to be in church, my boy!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2962">‘I have little thought of church today, Mr Finsbury,’ said the drawing-master. </span>
      <span id="f2963">‘I am on the brink of something new, Sir.’ And he presented the advertisement.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2964">‘Why, what is this?’ cried Michael, sitting suddenly up. </span>
      <span id="f2965">He studied it for half a minute with a frown. </span>
      <span id="f2966">‘Pitman, I don’t care about this document a particle,’ said he.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2967">‘It will have to be attended to, however,’ said Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2968">‘I thought you’d had enough of Waterloo,’ returned the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f2969">‘Have you started a morbid craving? </span>
      <span id="f2970">You’ve never been yourself anyway since you lost that beard. </span>
      <span id="f2971">I believe now it was where you kept your senses.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2972">‘Mr Finsbury,’ said the drawing-master, ‘I have tried to reason this matter out, and, with your permission, I should like to lay before you the results.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2973">‘Fire away,’ said Michael; ‘but please, Pitman, remember it’s Sunday, and let’s have no bad language.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2974">‘There are three views open to us,’ began Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f2975">‘First this may be connected with the barrel; second, it may be connected with Mr Semitopolis’s statue; and third, it may be from my wife’s brother, who went to Australia. </span>
      <span id="f2976">In the first case, which is of course possible, I confess the matter would be best allowed to drop.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2977">‘The court is with you there, Brother Pitman,’ said Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2978">‘In the second,’ continued the other, ‘it is plainly my duty to leave no stone unturned for the recovery of the lost antique.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2979">‘My dear fellow, Semitopolis has come down like a trump; he has pocketed the loss and left you the profit. </span>
      <span id="f2980">What more would you have?’ enquired the lawyer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2981">‘I conceive, sir, under correction, that Mr Semitopolis’s generosity binds me to even greater exertion,’ said the drawing-master. </span>
      <span id="f2982">‘The whole business was unfortunate; it was--I need not disguise it from you--it was illegal from the first: the more reason that I should try to behave like a gentleman,’ concluded Pitman, flushing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2983">‘I have nothing to say to that,’ returned the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f2984">‘I have sometimes thought I should like to try to behave like a gentleman myself; only it’s such a one-sided business, with the world and the legal profession as they are.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2985">‘Then, in the third,’ resumed the drawing-master, ‘if it’s Uncle Tim, of course, our fortune’s made.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2986">‘It’s not Uncle Tim, though,’ said the lawyer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2987">‘Have you observed that very remarkable expression: SOMETHING TO HIS ADVANTAGE?’ enquired Pitman shrewdly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2988">‘You innocent mutton,’ said Michael, ‘it’s the seediest commonplace in the English language, and only proves the advertiser is an ass. </span>
      <span id="f2989">Let me demolish your house of cards for you at once. </span>
      <span id="f2990">Would Uncle Tim make that blunder in your name?--in itself, the blunder is delicious, a huge improvement on the gross reality, and I mean to adopt it in the future; but is it like Uncle Tim?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2991">‘No, it’s not like him,’ Pitman admitted. </span>
      <span id="f2992">‘But his mind may have become unhinged at Ballarat.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2993">‘If you come to that, Pitman,’ said Michael, ‘the advertiser may be Queen Victoria, fired with the desire to make a duke of you. </span>
      <span id="f2994">I put it to yourself if that’s probable; and yet it’s not against the laws of nature. </span>
      <span id="f2995">But we sit here to consider probabilities; and with your genteel permission, I eliminate her Majesty and Uncle Tim on the threshold. </span>
      <span id="f2996">To proceed, we have your second idea, that this has some connection with the statue. </span>
      <span id="f2997">Possible; but in that case who is the advertiser? </span>
      <span id="f2998">Not Ricardi, for he knows your address; not the person who got the box, for he doesn’t know your name. </span>
      <span id="f2999">The vanman, I hear you suggest, in a lucid interval. </span>
      <span id="f3000">He might have got your name, and got it incorrectly, at the station; and he might have failed to get your address. </span>
      <span id="f3001">I grant the vanman. </span>
      <span id="f3002">But a question: Do you really wish to meet the vanman?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3003">‘Why should I not?’ asked Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3004">‘If he wants to meet you,’ replied Michael, ‘observe this: it is because he has found his address-book, has been to the house that got the statue, and-mark my words!--is moving at the instigation of the murderer.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3005">‘I should be very sorry to think so,’ said Pitman; ‘but I still consider it my duty to Mr Sernitopolis. </span>
      <span id="f3006">. </span>
      <span id="f3007">.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3008">‘Pitman,’ interrupted Michael, ‘this will not do. </span>
      <span id="f3009">Don’t seek to impose on your legal adviser; don’t try to pass yourself off for the Duke of Wellington, for that is not your line. </span>
      <span id="f3010">Come, I wager a dinner I can read your thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f3011">You still believe it’s Uncle Tim.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3012">‘Mr Finsbury,’ said the drawing-master, colouring, ‘you are not a man in narrow circumstances, and you have no family. </span>
      <span id="f3013">Guendolen is growing up, a very promising girl--she was confirmed this year; and I think you will be able to enter into my feelings as a parent when I tell you she is quite ignorant of dancing. </span>
      <span id="f3014">The boys are at the board school, which is all very well in its way; at least, I am the last man in the world to criticize the institutions of my native land. </span>
      <span id="f3015">But I had fondly hoped that Harold might become a professional musician; and little Otho shows a quite remarkable vocation for the Church. </span>
      <span id="f3016">I am not exactly an ambitious man...’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3017">‘Well, well,’ interrupted Michael. </span>
      <span id="f3018">‘Be explicit; you think it’s Uncle Tim?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3019">‘It might be Uncle Tim,’ insisted Pitman, ‘and if it were, and I neglected the occasion, how could I ever look my children in the face? </span>
      <span id="f3020">I do not refer to Mrs Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f3021">. </span>
      <span id="f3022">.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3023">‘No, you never do,’ said Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3024">‘. </span>
      <span id="f3025">. </span>
      <span id="f3026">. </span>
      <span id="f3027">but in the case of her own brother returning from Ballarat. </span>
      <span id="f3028">. </span>
      <span id="f3029">.’ continued Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3030">‘. </span>
      <span id="f3031">. </span>
      <span id="f3032">. </span>
      <span id="f3033">with his mind unhinged,’ put in the lawyer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3034">‘. </span>
      <span id="f3035">. </span>
      <span id="f3036">. </span>
      <span id="f3037">returning from Ballarat with a large fortune, her impatience may be more easily imagined than described,’ concluded Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3038">‘All right,’ said Michael, ‘be it so. </span>
      <span id="f3039">And what do you propose to do?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3040">‘I am going to Waterloo,’ said Pitman, ‘in disguise.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3041">‘All by your little self?’ enquired the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f3042">‘Well, I hope you think it safe. </span>
      <span id="f3043">Mind and send me word from the police cells.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3044">‘O, Mr Finsbury, I had ventured to hope--perhaps you might be induced to--to make one of us,’ faltered Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3045">‘Disguise myself on Sunday?’ cried Michael. </span>
      <span id="f3046">‘How little you understand my principles!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3047">‘Mr Finsbury, I have no means of showing you my gratitude; but let me ask you one question,’ said Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f3048">‘If I were a very rich client, would you not take the risk?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3049">‘Diamond, Diamond, you know not what you do!’ cried Michael. </span>
      <span id="f3050">‘Why, man, do you suppose I make a practice of cutting about London with my clients in disguise? </span>
      <span id="f3051">Do you suppose money would induce me to touch this business with a stick? </span>
      <span id="f3052">I give you my word of honour, it would not. </span>
      <span id="f3053">But I own I have a real curiosity to see how you conduct this interview--that tempts me; it tempts me, Pitman, more than gold--it should be exquisitely rich.’ And suddenly Michael laughed. </span>
      <span id="f3054">‘Well, Pitman,’ said he, ‘have all the truck ready in the studio. </span>
      <span id="f3055">I’ll go.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3056">About twenty minutes after two, on this eventful day, the vast and gloomy shed of Waterloo lay, like the temple of a dead religion, silent and deserted. </span>
      <span id="f3057">Here and there at one of the platforms, a train lay becalmed; here and there a wandering footfall echoed; the cab-horses outside stamped with startling reverberations on the stones; or from the neighbouring wilderness of railway an engine snorted forth a whistle. </span>
      <span id="f3058">The main-line departure platform slumbered like the rest; the booking-hutches closed; the backs of Mr Haggard’s novels, with which upon a weekday the bookstall shines emblazoned, discreetly hidden behind dingy shutters; the rare officials, undisguisedly somnambulant; and the customary loiterers, even to the middle-aged woman with the ulster and the handbag, fled to more congenial scenes. </span>
      <span id="f3059">As in the inmost dells of some small tropic island the throbbing of the ocean lingers, so here a faint pervading hum and trepidation told in every corner of surrounding London.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3060">At the hour already named, persons acquainted with John Dickson, of Ballarat, and Ezra Thomas, of the United States of America, would have been cheered to behold them enter through the booking-office.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3061">‘What names are we to take?’ enquired the latter, anxiously adjusting the window-glass spectacles which he had been suffered on this occasion to assume.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3062">‘There’s no choice for you, my boy,’ returned Michael. </span>
      <span id="f3063">‘Bent Pitman or nothing. </span>
      <span id="f3064">As for me, I think I look as if I might be called Appleby; something agreeably old-world about Appleby--breathes of Devonshire cider. </span>
      <span id="f3065">Talking of which, suppose you wet your whistle? </span>
      <span id="f3066">the interview is likely to be trying.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3067">‘I think I’ll wait till afterwards,’ returned Pitman; ‘on the whole, I think I’ll wait till the thing’s over. </span>
      <span id="f3068">I don’t know if it strikes you as it does me; but the place seems deserted and silent, Mr Finsbury, and filled with very singular echoes.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3069">‘Kind of Jack-in-the-box feeling?’ enquired Michael, ‘as if all these empty trains might be filled with policemen waiting for a signal? </span>
      <span id="f3070">and Sir Charles Warren perched among the girders with a silver whistle to his lips? </span>
      <span id="f3071">It’s guilt, Pitman.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3072">In this uneasy frame of mind they walked nearly the whole length of the departure platform, and at the western extremity became aware of a slender figure standing back against a pillar. </span>
      <span id="f3073">The figure was plainly sunk into a deep abstraction; he was not aware of their approach, but gazed far abroad over the sunlit station. </span>
      <span id="f3074">Michael stopped.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3075">‘Holloa!’ said he, ‘can that be your advertiser? </span>
      <span id="f3076">If so, I’m done with it.’ And then, on second thoughts: ‘Not so, either,’ he resumed more cheerfully. </span>
      <span id="f3077">‘Here, turn your back a moment. </span>
      <span id="f3078">So. </span>
      <span id="f3079">Give me the specs.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3080">‘But you agreed I was to have them,’ protested Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3081">‘Ah, but that man knows me,’ said Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3082">‘Does he? </span>
      <span id="f3083">what’s his name?’ cried Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3084">‘O, he took me into his confidence,’ returned the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f3085">‘But I may say one thing: if he’s your advertiser (and he may be, for he seems to have been seized with criminal lunacy) you can go ahead with a clear conscience, for I hold him in the hollow of my hand.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3086">The change effected, and Pitman comforted with this good news, the pair drew near to Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3087">‘Are you looking for Mr William Bent Pitman?’ enquired the drawing-master. </span>
      <span id="f3088">‘I am he.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3089">Morris raised his head. </span>
      <span id="f3090">He saw before him, in the speaker, a person of almost indescribable insignificance, in white spats and a shirt cut indecently low. </span>
      <span id="f3091">A little behind, a second and more burly figure offered little to criticism, except ulster, whiskers, spectacles, and deerstalker hat. </span>
      <span id="f3092">Since he had decided to call up devils from the underworld of London, Morris had pondered deeply on the probabilities of their appearance. </span>
      <span id="f3093">His first emotion, like that of Charoba when she beheld the sea, was one of disappointment; his second did more justice to the case. </span>
      <span id="f3094">Never before had he seen a couple dressed like these; he had struck a new stratum.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3095">‘I must speak with you alone,’ said he.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3096">‘You need not mind Mr Appleby,’ returned Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f3097">‘He knows all.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3098">‘All? </span>
      <span id="f3099">Do you know what I am here to speak of?’ enquired Morris--. </span>
      <span id="f3100">‘The barrel.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3101">Pitman turned pale, but it was with manly indignation. </span>
      <span id="f3102">‘You are the man!’ he cried. </span>
      <span id="f3103">‘You very wicked person.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3104">‘Am I to speak before him?’ asked Morris, disregarding these severe expressions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3105">‘He has been present throughout,’ said Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f3106">‘He opened the barrel; your guilty secret is already known to him, as well as to your Maker and myself.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3107">‘Well, then,’ said Morris, ‘what have you done with the money?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3108">‘I know nothing about any money,’ said Pitman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3109">‘You needn’t try that on,’ said Morris. </span>
      <span id="f3110">‘I have tracked you down; you came to the station sacrilegiously disguised as a clergyman, procured my barrel, opened it, rifled the body, and cashed the bill. </span>
      <span id="f3111">I have been to the bank, I tell you! </span>
      <span id="f3112">I have followed you step by step, and your denials are childish and absurd.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3113">‘Come, come, Morris, keep your temper,’ said Mr Appleby.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3114">‘Michael!’ cried Morris, ‘Michael here too!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3115">‘Here too,’ echoed the lawyer; ‘here and everywhere, my good fellow; every step you take is counted; trained detectives follow you like your shadow; they report to me every three-quarters of an hour; no expense is spared.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3116">Morris’s face took on a hue of dirty grey. </span>
      <span id="f3117">‘Well, I don’t care; I have the less reserve to keep,’ he cried. </span>
      <span id="f3118">‘That man cashed my bill; it’s a theft, and I want the money back.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3119">‘Do you think I would lie to you, Morris?’ asked Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3120">‘I don’t know,’ said his cousin. </span>
      <span id="f3121">‘I want my money.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3122">‘It was I alone who touched the body,’ began Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3123">‘You? </span>
      <span id="f3124">Michael!’ cried Morris, starting back. </span>
      <span id="f3125">‘Then why haven’t you declared the death?’ ‘What the devil do you mean?’ asked Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3126">‘Am I mad? </span>
      <span id="f3127">or are you?’ cried Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3128">‘I think it must be Pitman,’ said Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3129">The three men stared at each other, wild-eyed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3130">‘This is dreadful,’ said Morris, ‘dreadful. </span>
      <span id="f3131">I do not understand one word that is addressed to me.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3132">‘I give you my word of honour, no more do I,’ said Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3133">‘And in God’s name, why whiskers?’ cried Morris, pointing in a ghastly manner at his cousin. </span>
      <span id="f3134">‘Does my brain reel? </span>
      <span id="f3135">How whiskers?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3136">‘O, that’s a matter of detail,’ said Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3137">There was another silence, during which Morris appeared to himself to be shot in a trapeze as high as St Paul’s, and as low as Baker Street Station.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3138">‘Let us recapitulate,’ said Michael, ‘unless it’s really a dream, in which case I wish Teena would call me for breakfast. </span>
      <span id="f3139">My friend Pitman, here, received a barrel which, it now appears, was meant for you. </span>
      <span id="f3140">The barrel contained the body of a man. </span>
      <span id="f3141">How or why you killed him...’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3142">‘I never laid a hand on him,’ protested Morris. </span>
      <span id="f3143">‘This is what I have dreaded all along. </span>
      <span id="f3144">But think, Michael! </span>
      <span id="f3145">I’m not that kind of man; with all my faults, I wouldn’t touch a hair of anybody’s head, and it was all dead loss to me. </span>
      <span id="f3146">He got killed in that vile accident.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3147">Suddenly Michael was seized by mirth so prolonged and excessive that his companions supposed beyond a doubt his reason had deserted him. </span>
      <span id="f3148">Again and again he struggled to compose himself, and again and again laughter overwhelmed him like a tide. </span>
      <span id="f3149">In all this maddening interview there had been no more spectral feature than this of Michael’s merriment; and Pitman and Morris, drawn together by the common fear, exchanged glances of anxiety.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3150">‘Morris,’ gasped the lawyer, when he was at last able to articulate, ‘hold on, I see it all now. </span>
      <span id="f3151">I can make it clear in one word. </span>
      <span id="f3152">Here’s the key: I NEVER GUESSED IT WAS UNCLE JOSEPH TILL THIS MOMENT.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3153">This remark produced an instant lightening of the tension for Morris. </span>
      <span id="f3154">For Pitman it quenched the last ray of hope and daylight. </span>
      <span id="f3155">Uncle Joseph, whom he had left an hour ago in Norfolk Street, pasting newspaper cuttings?--it?--the dead body?--then who was he, Pitman? </span>
      <span id="f3156">and was this Waterloo Station or Colney Hatch?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3157">‘To be sure!’ cried Morris; ‘it was badly smashed, I know. </span>
      <span id="f3158">How stupid not to think of that! </span>
      <span id="f3159">Why, then, all’s clear; and, my dear Michael, I’ll tell you what--we’re saved, both saved. </span>
      <span id="f3160">You get the tontine--I don’t grudge it you the least--and I get the leather business, which is really beginning to look up. </span>
      <span id="f3161">Declare the death at once, don’t mind me in the smallest, don’t consider me; declare the death, and we’re all right.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3162">‘Ah, but I can’t declare it,’ said Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3163">‘Why not?’ cried Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3164">‘I can’t produce the corpus, Morris. </span>
      <span id="f3165">I’ve lost it,’ said the lawyer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3166">‘Stop a bit,’ ejaculated the leather merchant. </span>
      <span id="f3167">‘How is this? </span>
      <span id="f3168">It’s not possible. </span>
      <span id="f3169">I lost it.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3170">‘Well, I’ve lost it too, my son,’ said Michael, with extreme serenity. </span>
      <span id="f3171">‘Not recognizing it, you see, and suspecting something irregular in its origin, I got rid of--what shall we say?--got rid of the proceeds at once.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3172">‘You got rid of the body? </span>
      <span id="f3173">What made you do that?’ walled Morris. </span>
      <span id="f3174">‘But you can get it again? </span>
      <span id="f3175">You know where it is?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3176">‘I wish I did, Morris, and you may believe me there, for it would be a small sum in my pocket; but the fact is, I don’t,’ said Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3177">‘Good Lord,’ said Morris, addressing heaven and earth, ‘good Lord, I’ve lost the leather business!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3178">Michael was once more shaken with laughter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3179">‘Why do you laugh, you fool?’ cried his cousin, ‘you lose more than I. </span>
      <span id="f3180">You’ve bungled it worse than even I did. </span>
      <span id="f3181">If you had a spark of feeling, you would be shaking in your boots with vexation. </span>
      <span id="f3182">But I’ll tell you one thing--I’ll have that eight hundred pound--I’ll have that and go to Swan River--that’s mine, anyway, and your friend must have forged to cash it. </span>
      <span id="f3183">Give me the eight hundred, here, upon this platform, or I go straight to Scotland Yard and turn the whole disreputable story inside out.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3184">‘Morris,’ said Michael, laying his hand upon his shoulder, ‘hear reason. </span>
      <span id="f3185">It wasn’t us, it was the other man. </span>
      <span id="f3186">We never even searched the body.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3187">‘The other man?’ repeated Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3188">‘Yes, the other man. </span>
      <span id="f3189">We palmed Uncle Joseph off upon another man,’ said Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3190">‘You what? </span>
      <span id="f3191">You palmed him off? </span>
      <span id="f3192">That’s surely a singular expression,’ said Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3193">‘Yes, palmed him off for a piano,’ said Michael with perfect simplicity. </span>
      <span id="f3194">‘Remarkably full, rich tone,’ he added.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3195">Morris carried his hand to his brow and looked at it; it was wet with sweat. </span>
      <span id="f3196">‘Fever,’ said he.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3197">‘No, it was a Broadwood grand,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f3198">‘Pitman here will tell you if it was genuine or not.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3199">‘Eh? </span>
      <span id="f3200">O! </span>
      <span id="f3201">O yes, I believe it was a genuine Broadwood; I have played upon it several times myself,’ said Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f3202">‘The three-letter E was broken.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3203">‘Don’t say anything more about pianos,’ said Morris, with a strong shudder; ‘I’m not the man I used to be! </span>
      <span id="f3204">This--this other man--let’s come to him, if I can only manage to follow. </span>
      <span id="f3205">Who is he? </span>
      <span id="f3206">Where can I get hold of him?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3207">‘Ah, that’s the rub,’ said Michael. </span>
      <span id="f3208">‘He’s been in possession of the desired article, let me see--since Wednesday, about four o’clock, and is now, I should imagine, on his way to the isles of Javan and Gadire.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3209">‘Michael,’ said Morris pleadingly, ‘I am in a very weak state, and I beg your consideration for a kinsman. </span>
      <span id="f3210">Say it slowly again, and be sure you are correct. </span>
      <span id="f3211">When did he get it?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3212">Michael repeated his statement.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3213">‘Yes, that’s the worst thing yet,’ said Morris, drawing in his breath.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3214">‘What is?’ asked the lawyer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3215">‘Even the dates are sheer nonsense,’ said the leather merchant.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3216">‘The bill was cashed on Tuesday. </span>
      <span id="f3217">There’s not a gleam of reason in the whole transaction.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3218">A young gentleman, who had passed the trio and suddenly started and turned back, at this moment laid a heavy hand on Michael’s shoulder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3219">‘Aha! </span>
      <span id="f3220">so this is Mr Dickson?’ said he.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3221">The trump of judgement could scarce have rung with a more dreadful note in the ears of Pitman and the lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f3222">To Morris this erroneous name seemed a legitimate enough continuation of the nightmare in which he had so long been wandering. </span>
      <span id="f3223">And when Michael, with his brand-new bushy whiskers, broke from the grasp of the stranger and turned to run, and the weird little shaven creature in the low-necked shirt followed his example with a bird-like screech, and the stranger (finding the rest of his prey escape him) pounced with a rude grasp on Morris himself, that gentleman’s frame of mind might be very nearly expressed in the colloquial phrase: ‘I told you so!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3224">‘I have one of the gang,’ said Gideon Forsyth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3225">‘I do not understand,’ said Morris dully.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3226">‘O, I will make you understand,’ returned Gideon grimly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3227">‘You will be a good friend to me if you can make me understand anything,’ cried Morris, with a sudden energy of conviction.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3228">‘I don’t know you personally, do I?’ continued Gideon, examining his unresisting prisoner. </span>
      <span id="f3229">‘Never mind, I know your friends. </span>
      <span id="f3230">They are your friends, are they not?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3231">‘I do not understand you,’ said Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3232">‘You had possibly something to do with a piano?’ suggested Gideon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3233">‘A piano!’ cried Morris, convulsively clasping Gideon by the arm. </span>
      <span id="f3234">‘Then you’re the other man! </span>
      <span id="f3235">Where is it? </span>
      <span id="f3236">Where is the body? </span>
      <span id="f3237">And did you cash the draft?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3238">‘Where is the body? </span>
      <span id="f3239">This is very strange,’ mused Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f3240">‘Do you want the body?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3241">‘Want it?’ cried Morris. </span>
      <span id="f3242">‘My whole fortune depends upon it! </span>
      <span id="f3243">I lost it. </span>
      <span id="f3244">Where is it? </span>
      <span id="f3245">Take me to it?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3246">‘O, you want it, do you? </span>
      <span id="f3247">And the other man, Dickson--does he want it?’ enquired Gideon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3248">‘Who do you mean by Dickson? </span>
      <span id="f3249">O, Michael Finsbury! </span>
      <span id="f3250">Why, of course he does! </span>
      <span id="f3251">He lost it too. </span>
      <span id="f3252">If he had it, he’d have won the tontine tomorrow.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3253">‘Michael Finsbury! </span>
      <span id="f3254">Not the solicitor?’ cried Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f3255">‘Yes, the solicitor,’ said Morris. </span>
      <span id="f3256">‘But where is the body?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3257">‘Then that is why he sent the brief! </span>
      <span id="f3258">What is Mr Finsbury’s private address?’ asked Gideon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3259">‘233 King’s Road. </span>
      <span id="f3260">What brief? </span>
      <span id="f3261">Where are you going? </span>
      <span id="f3262">Where is the body?’ cried Morris, clinging to Gideon’s arm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3263">‘I have lost it myself,’ returned Gideon, and ran out of the station.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>