<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XV. The Return of the Great Vance</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f3264">CHAPTER XV. The Return of the Great Vance</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f3266">Morris returned from Waterloo in a frame of mind that baffles description. </span>
      <span id="f3267">He was a modest man; he had never conceived an overweening notion of his own powers; he knew himself unfit to write a book, turn a table napkin-ring, entertain a Christmas party with legerdemain--grapple (in short) any of those conspicuous accomplishments that are usually classed under the head of genius. </span>
      <span id="f3268">He knew--he admitted--his parts to be pedestrian, but he had considered them (until quite lately) fully equal to the demands of life. </span>
      <span id="f3269">And today he owned himself defeated: life had the upper hand; if there had been any means of flight or place to flee to, if the world had been so ordered that a man could leave it like a place of entertainment, Morris would have instantly resigned all further claim on its rewards and pleasures, and, with inexpressible contentment, ceased to be. </span>
      <span id="f3270">As it was, one aim shone before him: he could get home. </span>
      <span id="f3271">Even as the sick dog crawls under the sofa, Morris could shut the door of John Street and be alone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3272">The dusk was falling when he drew near this place of refuge; and the first thing that met his eyes was the figure of a man upon the step, alternately plucking at the bell-handle and pounding on the panels. </span>
      <span id="f3273">The man had no hat, his clothes were hideous with filth, he had the air of a hop-picker. </span>
      <span id="f3274">Yet Morris knew him; it was John.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3275">The first impulse of flight was succeeded, in the elder brother’s bosom, by the empty quiescence of despair. </span>
      <span id="f3276">‘What does it matter now?’ he thought, and drawing forth his latchkey ascended the steps.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3277">John turned about; his face was ghastly with weariness and dirt and fury; and as he recognized the head of his family, he drew in a long rasping breath, and his eyes glittered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3278">‘Open that door,’ he said, standing back.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3279">‘I am going to,’ said Morris, and added mentally, ‘He looks like murder!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3280">The brothers passed into the hall, the door closed behind them; and suddenly John seized Morris by the shoulders and shook him as a terrier shakes a rat. </span>
      <span id="f3281">‘You mangy little cad,’ he said, ‘I’d serve you right to smash your skull!’ And shook him again, so that his teeth rattled and his head smote upon the wall.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3282">‘Don’t be violent, Johnny,’ said Morris. </span>
      <span id="f3283">‘It can’t do any good now.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3284">‘Shut your mouth,’ said John, ‘your time’s come to listen.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3285">He strode into the dining-room, fell into the easy-chair, and taking off one of his burst walking-shoes, nursed for a while his foot like one in agony. </span>
      <span id="f3286">‘I’m lame for life,’ he said. </span>
      <span id="f3287">‘What is there for dinner?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3288">‘Nothing, Johnny,’ said Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3289">‘Nothing? </span>
      <span id="f3290">What do you mean by that?’ enquired the Great Vance. </span>
      <span id="f3291">‘Don’t set up your chat to me!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3292">‘I mean simply nothing,’ said his brother. </span>
      <span id="f3293">‘I have nothing to eat, and nothing to buy it with. </span>
      <span id="f3294">I’ve only had a cup of tea and a sandwich all this day myself.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3295">‘Only a sandwich?’ sneered Vance. </span>
      <span id="f3296">‘I suppose YOU’RE going to complain next. </span>
      <span id="f3297">But you had better take care: I’ve had all I mean to take; and I can tell you what it is, I mean to dine and to dine well. </span>
      <span id="f3298">Take your signets and sell them.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3299">‘I can’t today,’ objected Morris; ‘it’s Sunday.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3300">‘I tell you I’m going to dine!’ cried the younger brother.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3301">‘But if it’s not possible, Johnny?’ pleaded the other.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3302">‘You nincompoop!’ cried Vance. </span>
      <span id="f3303">‘Ain’t we householders? </span>
      <span id="f3304">Don’t they know us at that hotel where Uncle Parker used to come. </span>
      <span id="f3305">Be off with you; and if you ain’t back in half an hour, and if the dinner ain’t good, first I’ll lick you till you don’t want to breathe, and then I’ll go straight to the police and blow the gaff. </span>
      <span id="f3306">Do you understand that, Morris Finsbury? </span>
      <span id="f3307">Because if you do, you had better jump.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3308">The idea smiled even upon the wretched Morris, who was sick with famine. </span>
      <span id="f3309">He sped upon his errand, and returned to find John still nursing his foot in the armchair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3310">‘What would you like to drink, Johnny?’ he enquired soothingly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3311">‘Fizz,’ said John. </span>
      <span id="f3312">‘Some of the poppy stuff from the end bin; a bottle of the old port that Michael liked, to follow; and see and don’t shake the port. </span>
      <span id="f3313">And look here, light the fire--and the gas, and draw down the blinds; it’s cold and it’s getting dark. </span>
      <span id="f3314">And then you can lay the cloth. </span>
      <span id="f3315">And, I say--here, you! </span>
      <span id="f3316">bring me down some clothes.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3317">The room looked comparatively habitable by the time the dinner came; and the dinner itself was good: strong gravy soup, fillets of sole, mutton chops and tomato sauce, roast beef done rare with roast potatoes, cabinet pudding, a piece of Chester cheese, and some early celery: a meal uncompromisingly British, but supporting.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3318">‘Thank God!’ said John, his nostrils sniffing wide, surprised by joy into the unwonted formality of grace. </span>
      <span id="f3319">‘Now I’m going to take this chair with my back to the fire--there’s been a strong frost these two last nights, and I can’t get it out of my bones; the celery will be just the ticket--I’m going to sit here, and you are going to stand there, Morris Finsbury, and play butler.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3320">‘But, Johnny, I’m so hungry myself,’ pleaded Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3321">‘You can have what I leave,’ said Vance. </span>
      <span id="f3322">‘You’re just beginning to pay your score, my daisy; I owe you one-pound-ten; don’t you rouse the British lion!’ There was something indescribably menacing in the face and voice of the Great Vance as he uttered these words, at which the soul of Morris withered. </span>
      <span id="f3323">‘There!’ resumed the feaster, ‘give us a glass of the fizz to start with. </span>
      <span id="f3324">Gravy soup! </span>
      <span id="f3325">And I thought I didn’t like gravy soup! </span>
      <span id="f3326">Do you know how I got here?’ he asked, with another explosion of wrath.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3327">‘No, Johnny; how could I?’ said the obsequious Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3328">‘I walked on my ten toes!’ cried John; ‘tramped the whole way from Browndean; and begged! </span>
      <span id="f3329">I would like to see you beg. </span>
      <span id="f3330">It’s not so easy as you might suppose. </span>
      <span id="f3331">I played it on being a shipwrecked mariner from Blyth; I don’t know where Blyth is, do you? </span>
      <span id="f3332">but I thought it sounded natural. </span>
      <span id="f3333">I begged from a little beast of a schoolboy, and he forked out a bit of twine, and asked me to make a clove hitch; I did, too, I know I did, but he said it wasn’t, he said it was a granny’s knot, and I was a what-d’ye-call-’em, and he would give me in charge. </span>
      <span id="f3334">Then I begged from a naval officer--he never bothered me with knots, but he only gave me a tract; there’s a nice account of the British navy!--and then from a widow woman that sold lollipops, and I got a hunch of bread from her. </span>
      <span id="f3335">Another party I fell in with said you could generally always get bread; and the thing to do was to break a plateglass window and get into gaol; seemed rather a brilliant scheme. </span>
      <span id="f3336">Pass the beef.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3337">‘Why didn’t you stay at Browndean?’ Morris ventured to enquire.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3338">‘Skittles!’ said John. </span>
      <span id="f3339">‘On what? </span>
      <span id="f3340">The Pink Un and a measly religious paper? </span>
      <span id="f3341">I had to leave Browndean; I had to, I tell you. </span>
      <span id="f3342">I got tick at a public, and set up to be the Great Vance; so would you, if you were leading such a beastly existence! </span>
      <span id="f3343">And a card stood me a lot of ale and stuff, and we got swipey, talking about music-halls and the piles of tin I got for singing; and then they got me on to sing “Around her splendid form I weaved the magic circle,” and then he said I couldn’t be Vance, and I stuck to it like grim death I was. </span>
      <span id="f3344">It was rot of me to sing, of course, but I thought I could brazen it out with a set of yokels. </span>
      <span id="f3345">It settled my hash at the public,’ said John, with a sigh. </span>
      <span id="f3346">‘And then the last thing was the carpenter--’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3347">‘Our landlord?’ enquired Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3348">‘That’s the party,’ said John. </span>
      <span id="f3349">‘He came nosing about the place, and then wanted to know where the water-butt was, and the bedclothes. </span>
      <span id="f3350">I told him to go to the devil; so would you too, when there was no possible thing to say! </span>
      <span id="f3351">And then he said I had pawned them, and did I know it was felony? </span>
      <span id="f3352">Then I made a pretty neat stroke. </span>
      <span id="f3353">I remembered he was deaf, and talked a whole lot of rot, very politely, just so low he couldn’t hear a word. </span>
      <span id="f3354">“I don’t hear you,” says he. </span>
      <span id="f3355">“I know you don’t, my buck, and I don’t mean you to,” says I, smiling away like a haberdasher. </span>
      <span id="f3356">“I’m hard of hearing,” he roars. </span>
      <span id="f3357">“I’d be in a pretty hot corner if you weren’t,”  says I, making signs as if I was explaining everything. </span>
      <span id="f3358">It was tip-top as long as it lasted. </span>
      <span id="f3359">“Well,” he said, “I’m deaf, worse luck, but I bet the constable can hear you.” And off he started one way, and I the other. </span>
      <span id="f3360">They got a spirit-lamp and the Pink Un, and that old religious paper, and another periodical you sent me. </span>
      <span id="f3361">I think you must have been drunk--it had a name like one of those spots that Uncle Joseph used to hold forth at, and it was all full of the most awful swipes about poetry and the use of the globes. </span>
      <span id="f3362">It was the kind of thing that nobody could read out of a lunatic asylum. </span>
      <span id="f3363">The Athaeneum, that was the name! </span>
      <span id="f3364">Golly, what a paper!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3365">‘Athenaeum, you mean,’ said Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3366">‘I don’t care what you call it,’ said John, ‘so as I don’t require to take it in! </span>
      <span id="f3367">There, I feel better. </span>
      <span id="f3368">Now I’m going to sit by the fire in the easy-chair; pass me the cheese, and the celery, and the bottle of port--no, a champagne glass, it holds more. </span>
      <span id="f3369">And now you can pitch in; there’s some of the fish left and a chop, and some fizz. </span>
      <span id="f3370">Ah,’ sighed the refreshed pedestrian, ‘Michael was right about that port; there’s old and vatted for you! </span>
      <span id="f3371">Michael’s a man I like; he’s clever and reads books, and the Athaeneum, and all that; but he’s not dreary to meet, he don’t talk Athaeneum like the other parties; why, the most of them would throw a blight over a skittle alley! </span>
      <span id="f3372">Talking of Michael, I ain’t bored myself to put the question, because of course I knew it from the first. </span>
      <span id="f3373">You’ve made a hash of it, eh?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3374">‘Michael made a hash of it,’ said Morris, flushing dark.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3375">‘What have we got to do with that?’ enquired John.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3376">‘He has lost the body, that’s what we have to do with it,’ cried Morris. </span>
      <span id="f3377">‘He has lost the body, and the death can’t be established.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3378">‘Hold on,’ said John. </span>
      <span id="f3379">‘I thought you didn’t want to?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3380">‘O, we’re far past that,’ said his brother. </span>
      <span id="f3381">‘It’s not the tontine now, it’s the leather business, Johnny; it’s the clothes upon our back.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3382">‘Stow the slow music,’ said John, ‘and tell your story from beginning to end.’ Morris did as he was bid.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3383">‘Well, now, what did I tell you?’ cried the Great Vance, when the other had done. </span>
      <span id="f3384">‘But I know one thing: I’m not going to be humbugged out of my property.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3385">‘I should like to know what you mean to do,’ said Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3386">‘I’ll tell you that,’ responded John with extreme decision. </span>
      <span id="f3387">‘I’m going to put my interests in the hands of the smartest lawyer in London; and whether you go to quod or not is a matter of indifference to me.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3388">‘Why, Johnny, we’re in the same boat!’ expostulated Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3389">‘Are we?’ cried his brother. </span>
      <span id="f3390">‘I bet we’re not! </span>
      <span id="f3391">Have I committed forgery? </span>
      <span id="f3392">have I lied about Uncle Joseph? </span>
      <span id="f3393">have I put idiotic advertisements in the comic papers? </span>
      <span id="f3394">have I smashed other people’s statues? </span>
      <span id="f3395">I like your cheek, Morris Finsbury. </span>
      <span id="f3396">No, I’ve let you run my affairs too long; now they shall go to Michael. </span>
      <span id="f3397">I like Michael, anyway; and it’s time I understood my situation.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3398">At this moment the brethren were interrupted by a ring at the bell, and Morris, going timorously to the door, received from the hands of a commissionaire a letter addressed in the hand of Michael. </span>
      <span id="f3399">Its contents ran as follows:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3400">MORRIS FINSBURY, if this should meet the eye of, he will hear of SOMETHING TO HIS ADVANTAGE at my office, in Chancery Lane, at 10 A.M. </span>
      <span id="f3401">tomorrow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3402">MICHAEL FINSBURY</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3403">So utter was Morris’s subjection that he did not wait to be asked, but handed the note to John as soon as he had glanced at it himself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3404">‘That’s the way to write a letter,’ cried John. </span>
      <span id="f3405">‘Nobody but Michael could have written that.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3406">And Morris did not even claim the credit of priority.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>