<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f3407">CHAPTER XVI. Final Adjustment of the Leather Business</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f3409">Finsbury brothers were ushered, at ten the next morning, into a large apartment in Michael’s office; the Great Vance, somewhat restored from yesterday’s exhaustion, but with one foot in a slipper; Morris, not positively damaged, but a man ten years older than he who had left Bournemouth eight days before, his face ploughed full of anxious wrinkles, his dark hair liberally grizzled at the temples.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3410">Three persons were seated at a table to receive them: Michael in the midst, Gideon Forsyth on his right hand, on his left an ancient gentleman with spectacles and silver hair. </span>
      <span id="f3411">‘By Jingo, it’s Uncle Joe!’ cried John.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3412">But Morris approached his uncle with a pale countenance and glittering eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3413">‘I’ll tell you what you did!’ he cried. </span>
      <span id="f3414">‘You absconded!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3415">‘Good morning, Morris Finsbury,’ returned Joseph, with no less asperity; ‘you are looking seriously ill.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3416">‘No use making trouble now,’ remarked Michael. </span>
      <span id="f3417">‘Look the facts in the face. </span>
      <span id="f3418">Your uncle, as you see, was not so much as shaken in the accident; a man of your humane disposition ought to be delighted.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3419">‘Then, if that’s so,’ Morris broke forth, ‘how about the body? </span>
      <span id="f3420">You don’t mean to insinuate that thing I schemed and sweated for, and colported with my own hands, was the body of a total stranger?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3421">‘O no, we can’t go as far as that,’ said Michael soothingly; ‘you may have met him at the club.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3422">Morris fell into a chair. </span>
      <span id="f3423">‘I would have found it out if it had come to the house,’ he complained. </span>
      <span id="f3424">‘And why didn’t it? </span>
      <span id="f3425">why did it go to Pitman? </span>
      <span id="f3426">what right had Pitman to open it?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3427">‘If you come to that, Morris, what have you done with the colossal Hercules?’ asked Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3428">‘He went through it with the meat-axe,’ said John. </span>
      <span id="f3429">‘It’s all in spillikins in the back garden.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3430">‘Well, there’s one thing,’ snapped Morris; ‘there’s my uncle again, my fraudulent trustee. </span>
      <span id="f3431">He’s mine, anyway. </span>
      <span id="f3432">And the tontine too. </span>
      <span id="f3433">I claim the tontine; I claim it now. </span>
      <span id="f3434">I believe Uncle Masterman’s dead.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3435">‘I must put a stop to this nonsense,’ said Michael, ‘and that for ever. </span>
      <span id="f3436">You say too near the truth. </span>
      <span id="f3437">In one sense your uncle is dead, and has been so long; but not in the sense of the tontine, which it is even on the cards he may yet live to win. </span>
      <span id="f3438">Uncle Joseph saw him this morning; he will tell you he still lives, but his mind is in abeyance.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3439">‘He did not know me,’ said Joseph; to do him justice, not without emotion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3440">‘So you’re out again there, Morris,’ said John. </span>
      <span id="f3441">‘My eye! </span>
      <span id="f3442">what a fool you’ve made of yourself!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3443">‘And that was why you wouldn’t compromise,’ said Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3444">‘As for the absurd position in which you and Uncle Joseph have been making yourselves an exhibition,’ resumed Michael, ‘it is more than time it came to an end. </span>
      <span id="f3445">I have prepared a proper discharge in full, which you shall sign as a preliminary.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3446">‘What?’ cried Morris, ‘and lose my seven thousand eight hundred pounds, and the leather business, and the contingent interest, and get nothing? </span>
      <span id="f3447">Thank you.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3448">‘It’s like you to feel gratitude, Morris,’ began Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3449">‘O, I know it’s no good appealing to you, you sneering devil!’ cried Morris. </span>
      <span id="f3450">‘But there’s a stranger present, I can’t think why, and I appeal to him. </span>
      <span id="f3451">I was robbed of that money when I was an orphan, a mere child, at a commercial academy. </span>
      <span id="f3452">Since then, I’ve never had a wish but to get back my own. </span>
      <span id="f3453">You may hear a lot of stuff about me; and there’s no doubt at times I have been ill-advised. </span>
      <span id="f3454">But it’s the pathos of my situation; that’s what I want to show you.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3455">‘Morris,’ interrupted Michael, ‘I do wish you would let me add one point, for I think it will affect your judgement. </span>
      <span id="f3456">It’s pathetic too since that’s your taste in literature.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3457">‘Well, what is it?’ said Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3458">‘It’s only the name of one of the persons who’s to witness your signature, Morris,’ replied Michael. </span>
      <span id="f3459">‘His name’s Moss, my dear.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3460">There was a long silence. </span>
      <span id="f3461">‘I might have been sure it was you!’ cried Morris.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3462">‘You’ll sign, won’t you?’ said Michael.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3463">‘Do you know what you’re doing?’ cried Morris. </span>
      <span id="f3464">‘You’re compounding a felony.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3465">‘Very well, then, we won’t compound it, Morris,’ returned Michael. </span>
      <span id="f3466">‘See how little I understood the sterling integrity of your character! </span>
      <span id="f3467">I thought you would prefer it so.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3468">‘Look here, Michael,’ said John, ‘this is all very fine and large; but how about me? </span>
      <span id="f3469">Morris is gone up, I see that; but I’m not. </span>
      <span id="f3470">And I was robbed, too, mind you; and just as much an orphan, and at the blessed same academy as himself.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3471">‘Johnny,’ said Michael, ‘don’t you think you’d better leave it to me?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3472">‘I’m your man,’ said John. </span>
      <span id="f3473">‘You wouldn’t deceive a poor orphan, I’ll take my oath. </span>
      <span id="f3474">Morris, you sign that document, or I’ll start in and astonish your weak mind.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3475">With a sudden alacrity, Morris proffered his willingness. </span>
      <span id="f3476">Clerks were brought in, the discharge was executed, and there was Joseph a free man once more.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3477">‘And now,’ said Michael, ‘hear what I propose to do. </span>
      <span id="f3478">Here, John and Morris, is the leather business made over to the pair of you in partnership. </span>
      <span id="f3479">I have valued it at the lowest possible figure, Pogram and Jarris’s. </span>
      <span id="f3480">And here is a cheque for the balance of your fortune. </span>
      <span id="f3481">Now, you see, Morris, you start fresh from the commercial academy; and, as you said yourself the leather business was looking up, I suppose you’ll probably marry before long. </span>
      <span id="f3482">Here’s your marriage present--from a Mr Moss.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3483">Morris bounded on his cheque with a crimsoned countenance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3484">‘I don’t understand the performance,’ remarked John. </span>
      <span id="f3485">‘It seems too good to be true.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3486">‘It’s simply a readjustment,’ Michael explained. </span>
      <span id="f3487">‘I take up Uncle Joseph’s liabilities; and if he gets the tontine, it’s to be mine; if my father gets it, it’s mine anyway, you see. </span>
      <span id="f3488">So that I’m rather advantageously placed.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3489">‘Morris, my unconverted friend, you’ve got left,’ was John’s comment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3490">‘And now, Mr Forsyth,’ resumed Michael, turning to his silent guest, ‘here are all the criminals before you, except Pitman. </span>
      <span id="f3491">I really didn’t like to interrupt his scholastic career; but you can have him arrested at the seminary--I know his hours. </span>
      <span id="f3492">Here we are then; we’re not pretty to look at: what do you propose to do with us?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3493">‘Nothing in the world, Mr Finsbury,’ returned Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f3494">‘I seem to understand that this gentleman’---indicating Morris--‘is the fons et origo of the trouble; and, from what I gather, he has already paid through the nose. </span>
      <span id="f3495">And really, to be quite frank, I do not see who is to gain by any scandal; not me, at least. </span>
      <span id="f3496">And besides, I have to thank you for that brief.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3497">Michael blushed. </span>
      <span id="f3498">‘It was the least I could do to let you have some business,’ he said. </span>
      <span id="f3499">‘But there’s one thing more. </span>
      <span id="f3500">I don’t want you to misjudge poor Pitman, who is the most harmless being upon earth. </span>
      <span id="f3501">I wish you would dine with me tonight, and see the creature on his native heath--say at Verrey’s?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3502">‘I have no engagement, Mr Finsbury,’ replied Gideon. </span>
      <span id="f3503">‘I shall be delighted. </span>
      <span id="f3504">But subject to your judgement, can we do nothing for the man in the cart? </span>
      <span id="f3505">I have qualms of conscience.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3506">‘Nothing but sympathize,’ said Michael.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>