<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0006">THE SON OF THE BRAHMAN</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0007">In the shade of the house, in the sunshine of the riverbank near the boats, in the shade of the Sal-wood forest, in the shade of the fig tree is where Siddhartha grew up, the handsome son of the Brahman, the young falcon, together with his friend Govinda, son of a Brahman. </span>
      <span id="f0008"> The sun tanned his light shoulders by the banks of the river when bathing, performing the sacred ablutions, the sacred offerings. </span>
      <span id="f0009"> In the mango grove, shade poured into his black eyes, when playing as a boy, when his mother sang, when the sacred offerings were made, when his father, the scholar, taught him, when the wise men talked. </span>
      <span id="f0010"> For a long time, Siddhartha had been partaking in the discussions of the wise men, practising debate with Govinda, practising with Govinda the art of reflection, the service of meditation. </span>
      <span id="f0011"> He already knew how to speak the Om silently, the word of words, to speak it silently into himself while inhaling, to speak it silently out of himself while exhaling, with all the concentration of his soul, the forehead surrounded by the glow of the clear-thinking spirit. </span>
      <span id="f0012"> He already knew to feel Atman in the depths of his being, indestructible, one with the universe.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0013">Joy leapt in his father&#39;s heart for his son who was quick to learn, thirsty for knowledge; he saw him growing up to become great wise man and priest, a prince among the Brahmans.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0014">Bliss leapt in his mother&#39;s breast when she saw him, when she saw him walking, when she saw him sit down and get up, Siddhartha, strong, handsome, he who was walking on slender legs, greeting her with perfect respect.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0015">Love touched the hearts of the Brahmans&#39; young daughters when Siddhartha walked through the lanes of the town with the luminous forehead, with the eye of a king, with his slim hips.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0016">But more than all the others he was loved by Govinda, his friend, the son of a Brahman. </span>
      <span id="f0017"> He loved Siddhartha&#39;s eye and sweet voice, he loved his walk and the perfect decency of his movements, he loved everything Siddhartha did and said and what he loved most was his spirit, his transcendent, fiery thoughts, his ardent will, his high calling. </span>
      <span id="f0018">Govinda knew: he would not become a common Brahman, not a lazy official in charge of offerings; not a greedy merchant with magic spells; not a vain, vacuous speaker; not a mean, deceitful priest; and also not a decent, stupid sheep in the herd of the many. </span>
      <span id="f0019"> No, and he, Govinda, as well did not want to become one of those, not one of those tens of thousands of Brahmans. </span>
      <span id="f0020"> He wanted to follow Siddhartha, the beloved, the splendid. </span>
      <span id="f0021"> And in days to come, when Siddhartha would become a god, when he would join the glorious, then Govinda wanted to follow him as his friend, his companion, his servant, his spear-carrier, his shadow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0022">Siddhartha was thus loved by everyone. </span>
      <span id="f0023"> He was a source of joy for everybody, he was a delight for them all.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0024">But he, Siddhartha, was not a source of joy for himself, he found no delight in himself. </span>
      <span id="f0025"> Walking the rosy paths of the fig tree garden, sitting in the bluish shade of the grove of contemplation, washing his limbs daily in the bath of repentance, sacrificing in the dim shade of the mango forest, his gestures of perfect decency, everyone&#39;s love and joy, he still lacked all joy in his heart. </span>
      <span id="f0026"> Dreams and restless thoughts came into his mind, flowing from the water of the river, sparkling from the stars of the night, melting from the beams of the sun, dreams came to him and a restlessness of the soul, fuming from the sacrifices, breathing forth from the verses of the Rig-Veda, being infused into him, drop by drop, from the teachings of the old Brahmans.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0027">Siddhartha had started to nurse discontent in himself, he had started to feel that the love of his father and the love of his mother, and also the love of his friend, Govinda, would not bring him joy for ever and ever, would not nurse him, feed him, satisfy him. </span>
      <span id="f0028"> He had started to suspect that his venerable father and his other teachers, that the wise Brahmans had already revealed to him the most and best of their wisdom, that they had already filled his expecting vessel with their richness, and the vessel was not full, the spirit was not content, the soul was not calm, the heart was not satisfied. </span>
      <span id="f0029"> The ablutions were good, but they were water, they did not wash off the sin, they did not heal the spirit&#39;s thirst, they did not relieve the fear in his heart. </span>
      <span id="f0030"> The sacrifices and the invocation of the gods were excellent--but was that all? </span>
      <span id="f0031"> Did the sacrifices give a happy fortune? </span>
      <span id="f0032"> And what about the gods? </span>
      <span id="f0033">Was it really Prajapati who had created the world? </span>
      <span id="f0034"> Was it not the Atman, He, the only one, the singular one? </span>
      <span id="f0035"> Were the gods not creations, created like me and you, subject to time, mortal? </span>
      <span id="f0036"> Was it therefore good, was it right, was it meaningful and the highest occupation to make offerings to the gods? </span>
      <span id="f0037"> For whom else were offerings to be made, who else was to be worshipped but Him, the only one, the Atman? </span>
      <span id="f0038"> And where was Atman to be found, where did He reside, where did his eternal heart beat, where else but in one&#39;s own self, in its innermost part, in its indestructible part, which everyone had in himself? </span>
      <span id="f0039"> But where, where was this self, this innermost part, this ultimate part? </span>
      <span id="f0040"> It was not flesh and bone, it was neither thought nor consciousness, thus the wisest ones taught. </span>
      <span id="f0041"> So, where, where was it? </span>
      <span id="f0042"> To reach this place, the self, myself, the Atman, there was another way, which was worthwhile looking for? </span>
      <span id="f0043"> Alas, and nobody showed this way, nobody knew it, not the father, and not the teachers and wise men, not the holy sacrificial songs! </span>
      <span id="f0044"> They knew everything, the Brahmans and their holy books, they knew everything, they had taken care of everything and of more than everything, the creation of the world, the origin of speech, of food, of inhaling, of exhaling, the arrangement of the senses, the acts of the gods, they knew infinitely much--but was it valuable to know all of this, not knowing that one and only thing, the most important thing, the solely important thing?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0045">Surely, many verses of the holy books, particularly in the Upanishades of Samaveda, spoke of this innermost and ultimate thing, wonderful verses. </span>
      <span id="f0046"> &#34;Your soul is the whole world&#34;, was written there, and it was written that man in his sleep, in his deep sleep, would meet with his innermost part and would reside in the Atman. </span>
      <span id="f0047"> Marvellous wisdom was in these verses, all knowledge of the wisest ones had been collected here in magic words, pure as honey collected by bees. </span>
      <span id="f0048"> No, not to be looked down upon was the tremendous amount of enlightenment which lay here collected and preserved by innumerable generations of wise Brahmans.-- But where were the Brahmans, where the priests, where the wise men or penitents, who had succeeded in not just knowing this deepest of all knowledge but also to live it? </span>
      <span id="f0049"> Where was the knowledgeable one who wove his spell to bring his familiarity with the Atman out of the sleep into the state of being awake, into the life, into every step of the way, into word and deed? </span>
      <span id="f0050"> Siddhartha knew many venerable Brahmans, chiefly his father, the pure one, the scholar, the most venerable one. </span>
      <span id="f0051"> His father was to be admired, quiet and noble were his manners, pure his life, wise his words, delicate and noble thoughts lived behind its brow --but even he, who knew so much, did he live in blissfulness, did he have peace, was he not also just a searching man, a thirsty man? </span>
      <span id="f0052"> Did he not, again and again, have to drink from holy sources, as a thirsty man, from the offerings, from the books, from the disputes of the Brahmans? </span>
      <span id="f0053">Why did he, the irreproachable one, have to wash off sins every day, strive for a cleansing every day, over and over every day? </span>
      <span id="f0054"> Was not Atman in him, did not the pristine source spring from his heart? </span>
      <span id="f0055"> It had to be found, the pristine source in one&#39;s own self, it had to be possessed! </span>
      <span id="f0056"> Everything else was searching, was a detour, was getting lost.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0057">Thus were Siddhartha&#39;s thoughts, this was his thirst, this was his suffering.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0058">Often he spoke to himself from a Chandogya-Upanishad the words: &#34;Truly, the name of the Brahman is satyam--verily, he who knows such a thing, will enter the heavenly world every day.&#34;  Often, it seemed near, the heavenly world, but never he had reached it completely, never he had quenched the ultimate thirst. </span>
      <span id="f0059"> And among all the wise and wisest men, he knew and whose instructions he had received, among all of them there was no one, who had reached it completely, the heavenly world, who had quenched it completely, the eternal thirst.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0060">&#34;Govinda,&#34; Siddhartha spoke to his friend, &#34;Govinda, my dear, come with me under the Banyan tree, let&#39;s practise meditation.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0061">They went to the Banyan tree, they sat down, Siddhartha right here, Govinda twenty paces away. </span>
      <span id="f0062"> While putting himself down, ready to speak the Om, Siddhartha repeated murmuring the verse:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0063">Om is the bow, the arrow is soul, The Brahman is the arrow&#39;s target, That one should incessantly hit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0064">After the usual time of the exercise in meditation had passed, Govinda rose. </span>
      <span id="f0065"> The evening had come, it was time to perform the evening&#39;s ablution. </span>
      <span id="f0066">He called Siddhartha&#39;s name. </span>
      <span id="f0067"> Siddhartha did not answer. </span>
      <span id="f0068"> Siddhartha sat there lost in thought, his eyes were rigidly focused towards a very distant target, the tip of his tongue was protruding a little between the teeth, he seemed not to breathe. </span>
      <span id="f0069"> Thus sat he, wrapped up in contemplation, thinking Om, his soul sent after the Brahman as an arrow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0070">Once, Samanas had travelled through Siddhartha&#39;s town, ascetics on a pilgrimage, three skinny, withered men, neither old nor young, with dusty and bloody shoulders, almost naked, scorched by the sun, surrounded by loneliness, strangers and enemies to the world, strangers and lank jackals in the realm of humans. </span>
      <span id="f0071"> Behind them blew a hot scent of quiet passion, of destructive service, of merciless self-denial.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0072">In the evening, after the hour of contemplation, Siddhartha spoke to Govinda:  &#34;Early tomorrow morning, my friend, Siddhartha will go to the Samanas. </span>
      <span id="f0073"> He will become a Samana.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0074">Govinda turned pale, when he heard these words and read the decision in the motionless face of his friend, unstoppable like the arrow shot from the bow. </span>
      <span id="f0075"> Soon and with the first glance, Govinda realized:  Now it is beginning, now Siddhartha is taking his own way, now his fate is beginning to sprout, and with his, my own. </span>
      <span id="f0076"> And he turned pale like a dry banana-skin.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0077">&#34;O Siddhartha,&#34; he exclaimed, &#34;will your father permit you to do that?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0078">Siddhartha looked over as if he was just waking up. </span>
      <span id="f0079"> Arrow-fast he read in Govinda&#39;s soul, read the fear, read the submission.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0080">&#34;O Govinda,&#34; he spoke quietly, &#34;let&#39;s not waste words. </span>
      <span id="f0081"> Tomorrow, at daybreak I will begin the life of the Samanas. </span>
      <span id="f0082"> Speak no more of it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0083">Siddhartha entered the chamber, where his father was sitting on a mat of bast, and stepped behind his father and remained standing there, until his father felt that someone was standing behind him. </span>
      <span id="f0084"> Quoth the Brahman:  &#34;Is that you, Siddhartha? </span>
      <span id="f0085"> Then say what you came to say.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0086">Quoth Siddhartha: &#34;With your permission, my father. </span>
      <span id="f0087"> I came to tell you that it is my longing to leave your house tomorrow and go to the ascetics. </span>
      <span id="f0088"> My desire is to become a Samana. </span>
      <span id="f0089"> May my father not oppose this.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0090">The Brahman fell silent, and remained silent for so long that the stars in the small window wandered and changed their relative positions, &#39;ere the silence was broken. </span>
      <span id="f0091"> Silent and motionless stood the son with his arms folded, silent and motionless sat the father on the mat, and the stars traced their paths in the sky. </span>
      <span id="f0092"> Then spoke the father:  &#34;Not proper it is for a Brahman to speak harsh and angry words. </span>
      <span id="f0093"> But indignation is in my heart. </span>
      <span id="f0094"> I wish not to hear this request for a second time from your mouth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0095">Slowly, the Brahman rose; Siddhartha stood silently, his arms folded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0096">&#34;What are you waiting for?&#34; asked the father.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0097">Quoth Siddhartha:  &#34;You know what.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0098">Indignant, the father left the chamber; indignant, he went to his bed and lay down.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0099">After an hour, since no sleep had come over his eyes, the Brahman stood up, paced to and fro, and left the house. </span>
      <span id="f0100"> Through the small window of the chamber he looked back inside, and there he saw Siddhartha standing, his arms folded, not moving from his spot. </span>
      <span id="f0101"> Pale shimmered his bright robe. </span>
      <span id="f0102"> With anxiety in his heart, the father returned to his bed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0103">After another hour, since no sleep had come over his eyes, the Brahman stood up again, paced to and fro, walked out of the house and saw that the moon had risen. </span>
      <span id="f0104"> Through the window of the chamber he looked back inside; there stood Siddhartha, not moving from his spot, his arms folded, moonlight reflecting from his bare shins. </span>
      <span id="f0105"> With worry in his heart, the father went back to bed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0106">And he came back after an hour, he came back after two hours, looked through the small window, saw Siddhartha standing, in the moon light, by the light of the stars, in the darkness. </span>
      <span id="f0107"> And he came back hour after hour, silently, he looked into the chamber, saw him standing in the same place, filled his heart with anger, filled his heart with unrest, filled his heart with anguish, filled it with sadness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0108">And in the night&#39;s last hour, before the day began, he returned, stepped into the room, saw the young man standing there, who seemed tall and like a stranger to him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0109">&#34;Siddhartha,&#34; he spoke, &#34;what are you waiting for?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0110">&#34;You know what.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0111">&#34;Will you always stand that way and wait, until it&#39;ll becomes morning, noon, and evening?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0112">&#34;I will stand and wait.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0113">&#34;You will become tired, Siddhartha.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0114">&#34;I will become tired.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0115">&#34;You will fall asleep, Siddhartha.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0116">&#34;I will not fall asleep.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0117">&#34;You will die, Siddhartha.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0118">&#34;I will die.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0119">&#34;And would you rather die, than obey your father?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0120">&#34;Siddhartha has always obeyed his father.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0121">&#34;So will you abandon your plan?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0122">&#34;Siddhartha will do what his father will tell him to do.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0123">The first light of day shone into the room. </span>
      <span id="f0124"> The Brahman saw that Siddhartha was trembling softly in his knees. </span>
      <span id="f0125"> In Siddhartha&#39;s face he saw no trembling, his eyes were fixed on a distant spot. </span>
      <span id="f0126"> Then his father realized that even now Siddhartha no longer dwelt with him in his home, that he had already left him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0127">The Father touched Siddhartha&#39;s shoulder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0128">&#34;You will,&#34; he spoke, &#34;go into the forest and be a Samana. </span>
      <span id="f0129"> When you&#39;ll have found blissfulness in the forest, then come back and teach me to be blissful. </span>
      <span id="f0130"> If you&#39;ll find disappointment, then return and let us once again make offerings to the gods together. </span>
      <span id="f0131"> Go now and kiss your mother, tell her where you are going to. </span>
      <span id="f0132"> But for me it is time to go to the river and to perform the first ablution.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0133">He took his hand from the shoulder of his son and went outside. </span>
      <span id="f0134">Siddhartha wavered to the side, as he tried to walk. </span>
      <span id="f0135"> He put his limbs back under control, bowed to his father, and went to his mother to do as his father had said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0136">As he slowly left on stiff legs in the first light of day the still quiet town, a shadow rose near the last hut, who had crouched there, and joined the pilgrim--Govinda.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0137">&#34;You have come,&#34; said Siddhartha and smiled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0138">&#34;I have come,&#34; said Govinda.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>