<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0139">WITH THE SAMANAS</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0140">In the evening of this day they caught up with the ascetics, the skinny Samanas, and offered them their companionship and--obedience. </span>
      <span id="f0141"> They were accepted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0142">Siddhartha gave his garments to a poor Brahman in the street. </span>
      <span id="f0143"> He wore nothing more than the loincloth and the earth-coloured, unsown cloak. </span>
      <span id="f0144">He ate only once a day, and never something cooked. </span>
      <span id="f0145"> He fasted for fifteen days. </span>
      <span id="f0146"> He fasted for twenty-eight days. </span>
      <span id="f0147"> The flesh waned from his thighs and cheeks. </span>
      <span id="f0148"> Feverish dreams flickered from his enlarged eyes, long nails grew slowly on his parched fingers and a dry, shaggy beard grew on his chin. </span>
      <span id="f0149"> His glance turned to ice when he encountered women; his mouth twitched with contempt, when he walked through a city of nicely dressed people. </span>
      <span id="f0150"> He saw merchants trading, princes hunting, mourners wailing for their dead, whores offering themselves, physicians trying to help the sick, priests determining the most suitable day for seeding, lovers loving, mothers nursing their children--and all of this was not worthy of one look from his eye, it all lied, it all stank, it all stank of lies, it all pretended to be meaningful and joyful and beautiful, and it all was just concealed putrefaction. </span>
      <span id="f0151"> The world tasted bitter. </span>
      <span id="f0152"> Life was torture.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0153">A goal stood before Siddhartha, a single goal: to become empty, empty of thirst, empty of wishing, empty of dreams, empty of joy and sorrow. </span>
      <span id="f0154">Dead to himself, not to be a self any more, to find tranquility with an emptied heart, to be open to miracles in unselfish thoughts, that was his goal. </span>
      <span id="f0155"> Once all of my self was overcome and had died, once every desire and every urge was silent in the heart, then the ultimate part of me had to awake, the innermost of my being, which is no longer my self, the great secret.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0156">Silently, Siddhartha exposed himself to burning rays of the sun directly above, glowing with pain, glowing with thirst, and stood there, until he neither felt any pain nor thirst any more. </span>
      <span id="f0157"> Silently, he stood there in the rainy season, from his hair the water was dripping over freezing shoulders, over freezing hips and legs, and the penitent stood there, until he could not feel the cold in his shoulders and legs any more, until they were silent, until they were quiet. </span>
      <span id="f0158"> Silently, he cowered in the thorny bushes, blood dripped from the burning skin, from festering wounds dripped pus, and Siddhartha stayed rigidly, stayed motionless, until no blood flowed any more, until nothing stung any more, until nothing burned any more.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0159">Siddhartha sat upright and learned to breathe sparingly, learned to get along with only few breathes, learned to stop breathing. </span>
      <span id="f0160"> He learned, beginning with the breath, to calm the beat of his heart, leaned to reduce the beats of his heart, until they were only a few and almost none.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0161">Instructed by the oldest of the Samanas, Siddhartha practised self-denial, practised meditation, according to a new Samana rules. </span>
      <span id="f0162">A heron flew over the bamboo forest--and Siddhartha accepted the heron into his soul, flew over forest and mountains, was a heron, ate fish, felt the pangs of a heron&#39;s hunger, spoke the heron&#39;s croak, died a heron&#39;s death. </span>
      <span id="f0163"> A dead jackal was lying on the sandy bank, and Siddhartha&#39;s soul slipped inside the body, was the dead jackal, lay on the banks, got bloated, stank, decayed, was dismembered by hyaenas, was skinned by vultures, turned into a skeleton, turned to dust, was blown across the fields. </span>
      <span id="f0164"> And Siddhartha&#39;s soul returned, had died, had decayed, was scattered as dust, had tasted the gloomy intoxication of the cycle, awaited in new thirst like a hunter in the gap, where he could escape from the cycle, where the end of the causes, where an eternity without suffering began. </span>
      <span id="f0165"> He killed his senses, he killed his memory, he slipped out of his self into thousands of other forms, was an animal, was carrion, was stone, was wood, was water, and awoke every time to find his old self again, sun shone or moon, was his self again, turned round in the cycle, felt thirst, overcame the thirst, felt new thirst.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0166">Siddhartha learned a lot when he was with the Samanas, many ways leading away from the self he learned to go. </span>
      <span id="f0167"> He went the way of self-denial by means of pain, through voluntarily suffering and overcoming pain, hunger, thirst, tiredness. </span>
      <span id="f0168"> He went the way of self-denial by means of meditation, through imagining the mind to be void of all conceptions. </span>
      <span id="f0169">These and other ways he learned to go, a thousand times he left his self, for hours and days he remained in the non-self. </span>
      <span id="f0170"> But though the ways led away from the self, their end nevertheless always led back to the self. </span>
      <span id="f0171"> Though Siddhartha fled from the self a thousand times, stayed in nothingness, stayed in the animal, in the stone, the return was inevitable, inescapable was the hour, when he found himself back in the sunshine or in the moonlight, in the shade or in the rain, and was once again his self and Siddhartha, and again felt the agony of the cycle which had been forced upon him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0172">By his side lived Govinda, his shadow, walked the same paths, undertook the same efforts. </span>
      <span id="f0173"> They rarely spoke to one another, than the service and the exercises required. </span>
      <span id="f0174"> Occasionally the two of them went through the villages, to beg for food for themselves and their teachers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0175">&#34;How do you think, Govinda,&#34; Siddhartha spoke one day while begging this way, &#34;how do you think did we progress? </span>
      <span id="f0176"> Did we reach any goals?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0177">Govinda answered:  &#34;We have learned, and we&#39;ll continue learning. </span>
      <span id="f0178">You&#39;ll be a great Samana, Siddhartha. </span>
      <span id="f0179"> Quickly, you&#39;ve learned every exercise, often the old Samanas have admired you. </span>
      <span id="f0180"> One day, you&#39;ll be a holy man, oh Siddhartha.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0181">Quoth Siddhartha:  &#34;I can&#39;t help but feel that it is not like this, my friend. </span>
      <span id="f0182"> What I&#39;ve learned, being among the Samanas, up to this day, this, oh Govinda, I could have learned more quickly and by simpler means. </span>
      <span id="f0183"> In every tavern of that part of a town where the whorehouses are, my friend, among carters and gamblers I could have learned it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0184">Quoth Govinda:  &#34;Siddhartha is putting me on. </span>
      <span id="f0185"> How could you have learned meditation, holding your breath, insensitivity against hunger and pain there among these wretched people?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0186">And Siddhartha said quietly, as if he was talking to himself:  &#34;What is meditation? </span>
      <span id="f0187"> What is leaving one&#39;s body? </span>
      <span id="f0188"> What is fasting? </span>
      <span id="f0189"> What is holding one&#39;s breath? </span>
      <span id="f0190"> It is fleeing from the self, it is a short escape of the agony of being a self, it is a short numbing of the senses against the pain and the pointlessness of life. </span>
      <span id="f0191"> The same escape, the same short numbing is what the driver of an ox-cart finds in the inn, drinking a few bowls of rice-wine or fermented coconut-milk. </span>
      <span id="f0192"> Then he won&#39;t feel his self any more, then he won&#39;t feel the pains of life any more, then he finds a short numbing of the senses. </span>
      <span id="f0193"> When he falls asleep over his bowl of rice-wine, he&#39;ll find the same what Siddhartha and Govinda find when they escape their bodies through long exercises, staying in the non-self. </span>
      <span id="f0194"> This is how it is, oh Govinda.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0195">Quoth Govinda:  &#34;You say so, oh friend, and yet you know that Siddhartha is no driver of an ox-cart and a Samana is no drunkard. </span>
      <span id="f0196"> It&#39;s true that a drinker numbs his senses, it&#39;s true that he briefly escapes and rests, but he&#39;ll return from the delusion, finds everything to be unchanged, has not become wiser, has gathered no enlightenment,--has not risen several steps.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0197">And Siddhartha spoke with a smile:  &#34;I do not know, I&#39;ve never been a drunkard. </span>
      <span id="f0198"> But that I, Siddhartha, find only a short numbing of the senses in my exercises and meditations and that I am just as far removed from wisdom, from salvation, as a child in the mother&#39;s womb, this I know, oh Govinda, this I know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0199">And once again, another time, when Siddhartha left the forest together with Govinda, to beg for some food in the village for their brothers and teachers, Siddhartha began to speak and said:  &#34;What now, oh Govinda, might we be on the right path? </span>
      <span id="f0200"> Might we get closer to enlightenment? </span>
      <span id="f0201">Might we get closer to salvation? </span>
      <span id="f0202"> Or do we perhaps live in a circle-- we, who have thought we were escaping the cycle?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0203">Quoth Govinda:  &#34;We have learned a lot, Siddhartha, there is still much to learn. </span>
      <span id="f0204"> We are not going around in circles, we are moving up, the circle is a spiral, we have already ascended many a level.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0205">Siddhartha answered:  &#34;How old, would you think, is our oldest Samana, our venerable teacher?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0206">Quoth Govinda:  &#34;Our oldest one might be about sixty years of age.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0207">And Siddhartha:  &#34;He has lived for sixty years and has not reached the nirvana. </span>
      <span id="f0208"> He&#39;ll turn seventy and eighty, and you and me, we will grow just as old and will do our exercises, and will fast, and will meditate. </span>
      <span id="f0209">But we will not reach the nirvana, he won&#39;t and we won&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f0210"> Oh Govinda, I believe out of all the Samanas out there, perhaps not a single one, not a single one, will reach the nirvana. </span>
      <span id="f0211"> We find comfort, we find numbness, we learn feats, to deceive others. </span>
      <span id="f0212"> But the most important thing, the path of paths, we will not find.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0213">&#34;If you only,&#34; spoke Govinda, &#34;wouldn&#39;t speak such terrible words, Siddhartha! </span>
      <span id="f0214"> How could it be that among so many learned men, among so many Brahmans, among so many austere and venerable Samanas, among so many who are searching, so many who are eagerly trying, so many holy men, no one will find the path of paths?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0215">But Siddhartha said in a voice which contained just as much sadness as mockery, with a quiet, a slightly sad, a slightly mocking voice:  &#34;Soon, Govinda, your friend will leave the path of the Samanas, he has walked along your side for so long. </span>
      <span id="f0216"> I&#39;m suffering of thirst, oh Govinda, and on this long path of a Samana, my thirst has remained as strong as ever. </span>
      <span id="f0217">I always thirsted for knowledge, I have always been full of questions. </span>
      <span id="f0218">I have asked the Brahmans, year after year, and I have asked the holy Vedas, year after year, and I have asked the devote Samanas, year after year. </span>
      <span id="f0219"> Perhaps, oh Govinda, it had been just as well, had been just as smart and just as profitable, if I had asked the hornbill-bird or the chimpanzee. </span>
      <span id="f0220"> It took me a long time and am not finished learning this yet, oh Govinda: that there is nothing to be learned! </span>
      <span id="f0221"> There is indeed no such thing, so I believe, as what we refer to as `learning&#39;. </span>
      <span id="f0222"> There is, oh my friend, just one knowledge, this is everywhere, this is Atman, this is within me and within you and within every creature. </span>
      <span id="f0223"> And so I&#39;m starting to believe that this knowledge has no worser enemy than the desire to know it, than learning.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0224">At this, Govinda stopped on the path, rose his hands, and spoke:  &#34;If you, Siddhartha, only would not bother your friend with this kind of talk! </span>
      <span id="f0225"> Truly, you words stir up fear in my heart. </span>
      <span id="f0226"> And just consider: what would become of the sanctity of prayer, what of the venerability of the Brahmans&#39; caste, what of the holiness of the Samanas, if it was as you say, if there was no learning?! </span>
      <span id="f0227"> What, oh Siddhartha, what would then become of all of this what is holy, what is precious, what is venerable on earth?!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0228">And Govinda mumbled a verse to himself, a verse from an Upanishad:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0229">He who ponderingly, of a purified spirit, loses himself in the meditation of Atman, unexpressable by words is his blissfulness of his heart.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0230">But Siddhartha remained silent. </span>
      <span id="f0231"> He thought about the words which Govinda had said to him and thought the words through to their end.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0232">Yes, he thought, standing there with his head low, what would remain of all that which seemed to us to be holy? </span>
      <span id="f0233"> What remains? </span>
      <span id="f0234"> What can stand the test? </span>
      <span id="f0235"> And he shook his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0236">At one time, when the two young men had lived among the Samanas for about three years and had shared their exercises, some news, a rumour, a myth reached them after being retold many times:  A man had appeared, Gotama by name, the exalted one, the Buddha, he had overcome the suffering of the world in himself and had halted the cycle of rebirths. </span>
      <span id="f0237">He was said to wander through the land, teaching, surrounded by disciples, without possession, without home, without a wife, in the yellow cloak of an ascetic, but with a cheerful brow, a man of bliss, and Brahmans and princes would bow down before him and would become his students.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0238">This myth, this rumour, this legend resounded, its fragrants rose up, here and there; in the towns, the Brahmans spoke of it and in the forest, the Samanas; again and again, the name of Gotama, the Buddha reached the ears of the young men, with good and with bad talk, with praise and with defamation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0239">It was as if the plague had broken out in a country and news had been spreading around that in one or another place there was a man, a wise man, a knowledgeable one, whose word and breath was enough to heal everyone who had been infected with the pestilence, and as such news would go through the land and everyone would talk about it, many would believe, many would doubt, but many would get on their way as soon as possible, to seek the wise man, the helper, just like this this myth ran through the land, that fragrant myth of Gotama, the Buddha, the wise man of the family of Sakya. </span>
      <span id="f0240"> He possessed, so the believers said, the highest enlightenment, he remembered his previous lives, he had reached the nirvana and never returned into the cycle, was never again submerged in the murky river of physical forms. </span>
      <span id="f0241"> Many wonderful and unbelievable things were reported of him, he had performed miracles, had overcome the devil, had spoken to the gods. </span>
      <span id="f0242"> But his enemies and disbelievers said, this Gotama was a vain seducer, he would spent his days in luxury, scorned the offerings, was without learning, and knew neither exercises nor self-castigation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0243">The myth of Buddha sounded sweet. </span>
      <span id="f0244"> The scent of magic flowed from these reports. </span>
      <span id="f0245"> After all, the world was sick, life was hard to bear--and behold, here a source seemed to spring forth, here a messenger seemed to call out, comforting, mild, full of noble promises. </span>
      <span id="f0246"> Everywhere where the rumour of Buddha was heard, everywhere in the lands of India, the young men listened up, felt a longing, felt hope, and among the Brahmans&#39; sons of the towns and villages every pilgrim and stranger was welcome, when he brought news of him, the exalted one, the Sakyamuni.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0247">The myth had also reached the Samanas in the forest, and also Siddhartha, and also Govinda, slowly, drop by drop, every drop laden with hope, every drop laden with doubt. </span>
      <span id="f0248"> They rarely talked about it, because the oldest one of the Samanas did not like this myth. </span>
      <span id="f0249"> He had heard that this alleged Buddha used to be an ascetic before and had lived in the forest, but had then turned back to luxury and worldly pleasures, and he had no high opinion of this Gotama.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0250">&#34;Oh Siddhartha,&#34; Govinda spoke one day to his friend. </span>
      <span id="f0251"> &#34;Today, I was in the village, and a Brahman invited me into his house, and in his house, there was the son of a Brahman from Magadha, who has seen the Buddha with his own eyes and has heard him teach. </span>
      <span id="f0252"> Verily, this made my chest ache when I breathed, and thought to myself:  If only I would too, if only we both would too, Siddhartha and me, live to see the hour when we will hear the teachings from the mouth of this perfected man! </span>
      <span id="f0253"> Speak, friend, wouldn&#39;t we want to go there too and listen to the teachings from the Buddha&#39;s mouth?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0254">Quoth Siddhartha:  &#34;Always, oh Govinda, I had thought, Govinda would stay with the Samanas, always I had believed his goal was to live to be sixty and seventy years of age and to keep on practising those feats and exercises, which are becoming a Samana. </span>
      <span id="f0255"> But behold, I had not known Govinda well enough, I knew little of his heart. </span>
      <span id="f0256"> So now you, my faithful friend, want to take a new path and go there, where the Buddha spreads his teachings.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0257">Quoth Govinda:  &#34;You&#39;re mocking me. </span>
      <span id="f0258"> Mock me if you like, Siddhartha! </span>
      <span id="f0259">But have you not also developed a desire, an eagerness, to hear these teachings? </span>
      <span id="f0260"> And have you not at one time said to me, you would not walk the path of the Samanas for much longer?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0261">At this, Siddhartha laughed in his very own manner, in which his voice assumed a touch of sadness and a touch of mockery, and said:  &#34;Well, Govinda, you&#39;ve spoken well, you&#39;ve remembered correctly. </span>
      <span id="f0262"> If you only remembered the other thing as well, you&#39;ve heard from me, which is that I have grown distrustful and tired against teachings and learning, and that my faith in words, which are brought to us by teachers, is small. </span>
      <span id="f0263"> But let&#39;s do it, my dear, I am willing to listen to these teachings--though in my heart I believe that we&#39;ve already tasted the best fruit of these teachings.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0264">Quoth Govinda:  &#34;Your willingness delights my heart. </span>
      <span id="f0265"> But tell me, how should this be possible? </span>
      <span id="f0266"> How should the Gotama&#39;s teachings, even before we have heard them, have already revealed their best fruit to us?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0267">Quoth Siddhartha:  &#34;Let us eat this fruit and wait for the rest, oh Govinda! </span>
      <span id="f0268"> But this fruit, which we already now received thanks to the Gotama, consisted in him calling us away from the Samanas! </span>
      <span id="f0269"> Whether he has also other and better things to give us, oh friend, let us await with calm hearts.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0270">On this very same day, Siddhartha informed the oldest one of the Samanas of his decision, that he wanted to leave him. </span>
      <span id="f0271"> He informed the oldest one with all the courtesy and modesty becoming to a younger one and a student. </span>
      <span id="f0272"> But the Samana became angry, because the two young men wanted to leave him, and talked loudly and used crude swearwords.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0273">Govinda was startled and became embarrassed. </span>
      <span id="f0274"> But Siddhartha put his mouth close to Govinda&#39;s ear and whispered to him:  &#34;Now, I want to show the old man that I&#39;ve learned something from him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0275">Positioning himself closely in front of the Samana, with a concentrated soul, he captured the old man&#39;s glance with his glances, deprived him of his power, made him mute, took away his free will, subdued him under his own will, commanded him, to do silently, whatever he demanded him to do. </span>
      <span id="f0276">The old man became mute, his eyes became motionless, his will was paralysed, his arms were hanging down; without power, he had fallen victim to Siddhartha&#39;s spell. </span>
      <span id="f0277"> But Siddhartha&#39;s thoughts brought the Samana under their control, he had to carry out, what they commanded. </span>
      <span id="f0278">And thus, the old man made several bows, performed gestures of blessing, spoke stammeringly a godly wish for a good journey. </span>
      <span id="f0279"> And the young men returned the bows with thanks, returned the wish, went on their way with salutations.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0280">On the way, Govinda said:  &#34;Oh Siddhartha, you have learned more from the Samanas than I knew. </span>
      <span id="f0281"> It is hard, it is very hard to cast a spell on an old Samana. </span>
      <span id="f0282"> Truly, if you had stayed there, you would soon have learned to walk on water.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0283">&#34;I do not seek to walk on water,&#34; said Siddhartha. </span>
      <span id="f0284"> &#34;Let old Samanas be content with such feats!&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>