<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0285">GOTAMA</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0286">In the town of Savathi, every child knew the name of the exalted Buddha, and every house was prepared to fill the alms-dish of Gotama&#39;s disciples, the silently begging ones. </span>
      <span id="f0287"> Near the town was Gotama&#39;s favourite place to stay, the grove of Jetavana, which the rich merchant Anathapindika, an obedient worshipper of the exalted one, had given him and his people for a gift.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0288">All tales and answers, which the two young ascetics had received in their search for Gotama&#39;s abode, had pointed them towards this area. </span>
      <span id="f0289">And arriving at Savathi, in the very first house, before the door of which they stopped to beg, food has been offered to them, and they accepted the food, and Siddhartha asked the woman, who handed them the food:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0290">&#34;We would like to know, oh charitable one, where the Buddha dwells, the most venerable one, for we are two Samanas from the forest and have come, to see him, the perfected one, and to hear the teachings from his mouth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0291">Quoth the woman:  &#34;Here, you have truly come to the right place, you Samanas from the forest. </span>
      <span id="f0292"> You should know, in Jetavana, in the garden of Anathapindika is where the exalted one dwells. </span>
      <span id="f0293"> There you pilgrims shall spent the night, for there is enough space for the innumerable, who flock here, to hear the teachings from his mouth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0294">This made Govinda happy, and full of joy he exclaimed:  &#34;Well so, thus we have reached our destination, and our path has come to an end! </span>
      <span id="f0295"> But tell us, oh mother of the pilgrims, do you know him, the Buddha, have you seen him with your own eyes?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0296">Quoth the woman:  &#34;Many times I have seen him, the exalted one. </span>
      <span id="f0297"> On many days, I have seen him, walking through the alleys in silence, wearing his yellow cloak, presenting his alms-dish in silence at the doors of the houses, leaving with a filled dish.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0298">Delightedly, Govinda listened and wanted to ask and hear much more. </span>
      <span id="f0299">But Siddhartha urged him to walk on. </span>
      <span id="f0300"> They thanked and left and hardly had to ask for directions, for rather many pilgrims and monks as well from Gotama&#39;s community were on their way to the Jetavana. </span>
      <span id="f0301"> And since they reached it at night, there were constant arrivals, shouts, and talk of those who sought shelter and got it. </span>
      <span id="f0302"> The two Samanas, accustomed to life in the forest, found quickly and without making any noise a place to stay and rested there until the morning.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0303">At sunrise, they saw with astonishment what a large crowd of believers and curious people had spent the night here. </span>
      <span id="f0304"> On all paths of the marvellous grove, monks walked in yellow robes, under the trees they sat here and there, in deep contemplation--or in a conversation about spiritual matters, the shady gardens looked like a city, full of people, bustling like bees. </span>
      <span id="f0305"> The majority of the monks went out with their alms-dish, to collect food in town for their lunch, the only meal of the day. </span>
      <span id="f0306"> The Buddha himself, the enlightened one, was also in the habit of taking this walk to beg in the morning.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0307">Siddhartha saw him, and he instantly recognised him, as if a god had pointed him out to him. </span>
      <span id="f0308"> He saw him, a simple man in a yellow robe, bearing the alms-dish in his hand, walking silently.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0309">&#34;Look here!&#34; Siddhartha said quietly to Govinda. </span>
      <span id="f0310"> &#34;This one is the Buddha.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0311">Attentively, Govinda looked at the monk in the yellow robe, who seemed to be in no way different from the hundreds of other monks. </span>
      <span id="f0312"> And soon, Govinda also realized:  This is the one. </span>
      <span id="f0313"> And they followed him and observed him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0314">The Buddha went on his way, modestly and deep in his thoughts, his calm face was neither happy nor sad, it seemed to smile quietly and inwardly. </span>
      <span id="f0315"> With a hidden smile, quiet, calm, somewhat resembling a healthy child, the Buddha walked, wore the robe and placed his feet just as all of his monks did, according to a precise rule. </span>
      <span id="f0316"> But his face and his walk, his quietly lowered glance, his quietly dangling hand and even every finger of his quietly dangling hand expressed peace, expressed perfection, did not search, did not imitate, breathed softly in an unwhithering calm, in an unwhithering light, an untouchable peace.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0317">Thus Gotama walked towards the town, to collect alms, and the two Samanas recognised him solely by the perfection of his calm, by the quietness of his appearance, in which there was no searching, no desire, no imitation, no effort to be seen, only light and peace.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0318">&#34;Today, we&#39;ll hear the teachings from his mouth.&#34; said Govinda.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0319">Siddhartha did not answer. </span>
      <span id="f0320"> He felt little curiosity for the teachings, he did not believe that they would teach him anything new, but he had, just as Govinda had, heard the contents of this Buddha&#39;s teachings again and again, though these reports only represented second- or third-hand information. </span>
      <span id="f0321"> But attentively he looked at Gotama&#39;s head, his shoulders, his feet, his quietly dangling hand, and it seemed to him as if every joint of every finger of this hand was of these teachings, spoke of, breathed of, exhaled the fragrant of, glistened of truth. </span>
      <span id="f0322"> This man, this Buddha was truthful down to the gesture of his last finger. </span>
      <span id="f0323"> This man was holy. </span>
      <span id="f0324"> Never before, Siddhartha had venerated a person so much, never before he had loved a person as much as this one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0325">They both followed the Buddha until they reached the town and then returned in silence, for they themselves intended to abstain from on this day. </span>
      <span id="f0326"> They saw Gotama returning--what he ate could not even have satisfied a bird&#39;s appetite, and they saw him retiring into the shade of the mango-trees.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0327">But in the evening, when the heat cooled down and everyone in the camp started to bustle about and gathered around, they heard the Buddha teaching. </span>
      <span id="f0328"> They heard his voice, and it was also perfected, was of perfect calmness, was full of peace. </span>
      <span id="f0329"> Gotama taught the teachings of suffering, of the origin of suffering, of the way to relieve suffering. </span>
      <span id="f0330">Calmly and clearly his quiet speech flowed on. </span>
      <span id="f0331"> Suffering was life, full of suffering was the world, but salvation from suffering had been found:  salvation was obtained by him who would walk the path of the Buddha. </span>
      <span id="f0332"> With a soft, yet firm voice the exalted one spoke, taught the four main doctrines, taught the eightfold path, patiently he went the usual path of the teachings, of the examples, of the repetitions, brightly and quietly his voice hovered over the listeners, like a light, like a starry sky.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0333">When the Buddha--night had already fallen--ended his speech, many a pilgrim stepped forward and asked to accepted into the community, sought refuge in the teachings. </span>
      <span id="f0334"> And Gotama accepted them by speaking:  &#34;You have heard the teachings well, it has come to you well. </span>
      <span id="f0335"> Thus join us and walk in holiness, to put an end to all suffering.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0336">Behold, then Govinda, the shy one, also stepped forward and spoke:  &#34;I also take my refuge in the exalted one and his teachings,&#34; and he asked to accepted into the community of his disciples and was accepted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0337">Right afterwards, when the Buddha had retired for the night, Govinda turned to Siddhartha and spoke eagerly:  &#34;Siddhartha, it is not my place to scold you. </span>
      <span id="f0338"> We have both heard the exalted one, we have both perceived the teachings. </span>
      <span id="f0339"> Govinda has heard the teachings, he has taken refuge in it. </span>
      <span id="f0340"> But you, my honoured friend, don&#39;t you also want to walk the path of salvation? </span>
      <span id="f0341"> Would you want to hesitate, do you want to wait any longer?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0342">Siddhartha awakened as if he had been asleep, when he heard Govinda&#39;s words. </span>
      <span id="f0343"> For a long time, he looked into Govinda&#39;s face. </span>
      <span id="f0344"> Then he spoke quietly, in a voice without mockery:  &#34;Govinda, my friend, now you have taken this step, now you have chosen this path. </span>
      <span id="f0345"> Always, oh Govinda, you&#39;ve been my friend, you&#39;ve always walked one step behind me. </span>
      <span id="f0346"> Often I have thought:  Won&#39;t Govinda for once also take a step by himself, without me, out of his own soul? </span>
      <span id="f0347"> Behold, now you&#39;ve turned into a man and are choosing your path for yourself. </span>
      <span id="f0348"> I wish that you would go it up to its end, oh my friend, that you shall find salvation!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0349">Govinda, not completely understanding it yet, repeated his question in an impatient tone:  &#34;Speak up, I beg you, my dear! </span>
      <span id="f0350"> Tell me, since it could not be any other way, that you also, my learned friend, will take your refuge with the exalted Buddha!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0351">Siddhartha placed his hand on Govinda&#39;s shoulder:  &#34;You failed to hear my good wish for you, oh Govinda. </span>
      <span id="f0352"> I&#39;m repeating it:  I wish that you would go this path up to its end, that you shall find salvation!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0353">In this moment, Govinda realized that his friend had left him, and he started to weep.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0354">&#34;Siddhartha!&#34; he exclaimed lamentingly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0355">Siddhartha kindly spoke to him:  &#34;Don&#39;t forget, Govinda, that you are now one of the Samanas of the Buddha! </span>
      <span id="f0356"> You have renounced your home and your parents, renounced your birth and possessions, renounced your free will, renounced all friendship. </span>
      <span id="f0357"> This is what the teachings require, this is what the exalted one wants. </span>
      <span id="f0358"> This is what you wanted for yourself. </span>
      <span id="f0359"> Tomorrow, oh Govinda, I&#39;ll leave you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0360">For a long time, the friends continued walking in the grove; for a long time, they lay there and found no sleep. </span>
      <span id="f0361"> And over and over again, Govinda urged his friend, he should tell him why he would not want to seek refuge in Gotama&#39;s teachings, what fault he would find in these teachings. </span>
      <span id="f0362"> But Siddhartha turned him away every time and said:  &#34;Be content, Govinda! </span>
      <span id="f0363"> Very good are the teachings of the exalted one, how could I find a fault in them?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0364">Very early in the morning, a follower of Buddha, one of his oldest monks, went through the garden and called all those to him who had as novices taken their refuge in the teachings, to dress them up in the yellow robe and to instruct them in the first teachings and duties of their position. </span>
      <span id="f0365"> Then Govinda broke loose, embraced once again his childhood friend and left with the novices.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0366">But Siddhartha walked through the grove, lost in thought.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0367">Then he happened to meet Gotama, the exalted one, and when he greeted him with respect and the Buddha&#39;s glance was so full of kindness and calm, the young man summoned his courage and asked the venerable one for the permission to talk to him. </span>
      <span id="f0368"> Silently the exalted one nodded his approval.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0369">Quoth Siddhartha:  &#34;Yesterday, oh exalted one, I had been privileged to hear your wondrous teachings. </span>
      <span id="f0370"> Together with my friend, I had come from afar, to hear your teachings. </span>
      <span id="f0371"> And now my friend is going to stay with your people, he has taken his refuge with you. </span>
      <span id="f0372"> But I will again start on my pilgrimage.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0373">&#34;As you please,&#34; the venerable one spoke politely.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0374">&#34;Too bold is my speech,&#34; Siddhartha continued, &#34;but I do not want to leave the exalted one without having honestly told him my thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f0375">Does it please the venerable one to listen to me for one moment longer?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0376">Silently, the Buddha nodded his approval.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0377">Quoth Siddhartha:  &#34;One thing, oh most venerable one, I have admired in your teachings most of all. </span>
      <span id="f0378"> Everything in your teachings is perfectly clear, is proven; you are presenting the world as a perfect chain, a chain which is never and nowhere broken, an eternal chain the links of which are causes and effects. </span>
      <span id="f0379"> Never before, this has been seen so clearly; never before, this has been presented so irrefutably; truly, the heart of every Brahman has to beat stronger with love, once he has seen the world through your teachings perfectly connected, without gaps, clear as a crystal, not depending on chance, not depending on gods. </span>
      <span id="f0380">Whether it may be good or bad, whether living according to it would be suffering or joy, I do not wish to discuss, possibly this is not essential--but the uniformity of the world, that everything which happens is connected, that the great and the small things are all encompassed by the same forces of time, by the same law of causes, of coming into being and of dying, this is what shines brightly out of your exalted teachings, oh perfected one. </span>
      <span id="f0381"> But according to your very own teachings, this unity and necessary sequence of all things is nevertheless broken in one place, through a small gap, this world of unity is invaded by something alien, something new, something which had not been there before, and which cannot be demonstrated and cannot be proven: these are your teachings of overcoming the world, of salvation. </span>
      <span id="f0382">But with this small gap, with this small breach, the entire eternal and uniform law of the world is breaking apart again and becomes void. </span>
      <span id="f0383">Please forgive me for expressing this objection.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0384">Quietly, Gotama had listened to him, unmoved. </span>
      <span id="f0385"> Now he spoke, the perfected one, with his kind, with his polite and clear voice:  &#34;You&#39;ve heard the teachings, oh son of a Brahman, and good for you that you&#39;ve thought about it thus deeply. </span>
      <span id="f0386"> You&#39;ve found a gap in it, an error. </span>
      <span id="f0387"> You should think about this further. </span>
      <span id="f0388"> But be warned, oh seeker of knowledge, of the thicket of opinions and of arguing about words. </span>
      <span id="f0389"> There is nothing to opinions, they may be beautiful or ugly, smart or foolish, everyone can support them or discard them. </span>
      <span id="f0390"> But the teachings, you&#39;ve heard from me, are no opinion, and their goal is not to explain the world to those who seek knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f0391"> They have a different goal; their goal is salvation from suffering. </span>
      <span id="f0392"> This is what Gotama teaches, nothing else.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0393">&#34;I wish that you, oh exalted one, would not be angry with me,&#34; said the young man. </span>
      <span id="f0394"> &#34;I have not spoken to you like this to argue with you, to argue about words. </span>
      <span id="f0395"> You are truly right, there is little to opinions. </span>
      <span id="f0396">But let me say this one more thing:  I have not doubted in you for a single moment. </span>
      <span id="f0397"> I have not doubted for a single moment that you are Buddha, that you have reached the goal, the highest goal towards which so many thousands of Brahmans and sons of Brahmans are on their way. </span>
      <span id="f0398">You have found salvation from death. </span>
      <span id="f0399"> It has come to you in the course of your own search, on your own path, through thoughts, through meditation, through realizations, through enlightenment. </span>
      <span id="f0400"> It has not come to you by means of teachings! </span>
      <span id="f0401"> And--thus is my thought, oh exalted one,--nobody will obtain salvation by means of teachings! </span>
      <span id="f0402"> You will not be able to convey and say to anybody, oh venerable one, in words and through teachings what has happened to you in the hour of enlightenment! </span>
      <span id="f0403">The teachings of the enlightened Buddha contain much, it teaches many to live righteously, to avoid evil. </span>
      <span id="f0404"> But there is one thing which these so clear, these so venerable teachings do not contain:  they do not contain the mystery of what the exalted one has experienced for himself, he alone among hundreds of thousands. </span>
      <span id="f0405"> This is what I have thought and realized, when I have heard the teachings. </span>
      <span id="f0406"> This is why I am continuing my travels--not to seek other, better teachings, for I know there are none, but to depart from all teachings and all teachers and to reach my goal by myself or to die. </span>
      <span id="f0407"> But often, I&#39;ll think of this day, oh exalted one, and of this hour, when my eyes beheld a holy man.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0408">The Buddha&#39;s eyes quietly looked to the ground; quietly, in perfect equanimity his inscrutable face was smiling.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0409">&#34;I wish,&#34; the venerable one spoke slowly, &#34;that your thoughts shall not be in error, that you shall reach the goal! </span>
      <span id="f0410"> But tell me:  Have you seen the multitude of my Samanas, my many brothers, who have taken refuge in the teachings? </span>
      <span id="f0411"> And do you believe, oh stranger, oh Samana, do you believe that it would be better for them all the abandon the teachings and to return into the life the world and of desires?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0412">&#34;Far is such a thought from my mind,&#34; exclaimed Siddhartha. </span>
      <span id="f0413"> &#34;I wish that they shall all stay with the teachings, that they shall reach their goal! </span>
      <span id="f0414"> It is not my place to judge another person&#39;s life. </span>
      <span id="f0415"> Only for myself, for myself alone, I must decide, I must chose, I must refuse. </span>
      <span id="f0416">Salvation from the self is what we Samanas search for, oh exalted one. </span>
      <span id="f0417">If I merely were one of your disciples, oh venerable one, I&#39;d fear that it might happen to me that only seemingly, only deceptively my self would be calm and be redeemed, but that in truth it would live on and grow, for then I had replaced my self with the teachings, my duty to follow you, my love for you, and the community of the monks!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0418">With half of a smile, with an unwavering openness and kindness, Gotama looked into the stranger&#39;s eyes and bid him to leave with a hardly noticeable gesture.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0419">&#34;You are wise, oh Samana.&#34;, the venerable one spoke.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0420">&#34;You know how to talk wisely, my friend. </span>
      <span id="f0421"> Be aware of too much wisdom!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0422">The Buddha turned away, and his glance and half of a smile remained forever etched in Siddhartha&#39;s memory.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0423">I have never before seen a person glance and smile, sit and walk this way, he thought; truly, I wish to be able to glance and smile, sit and walk this way, too, thus free, thus venerable, thus concealed, thus open, thus child-like and mysterious. </span>
      <span id="f0424"> Truly, only a person who has succeeded in reaching the innermost part of his self would glance and walk this way. </span>
      <span id="f0425"> Well so, I also will seek to reach the innermost part of my self.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0426">I saw a man, Siddhartha thought, a single man, before whom I would have to lower my glance. </span>
      <span id="f0427"> I do not want to lower my glance before any other, not before any other. </span>
      <span id="f0428"> No teachings will entice me any more, since this man&#39;s teachings have not enticed me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0429">I am deprived by the Buddha, thought Siddhartha, I am deprived, and even more he has given to me. </span>
      <span id="f0430"> He has deprived me of my friend, the one who had believed in me and now believes in him, who had been my shadow and is now Gotama&#39;s shadow. </span>
      <span id="f0431"> But he has given me Siddhartha, myself.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>