<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>AWAKENING</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0432">AWAKENING</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0433">When Siddhartha left the grove, where the Buddha, the perfected one, stayed behind, where Govinda stayed behind, then he felt that in this grove his past life also stayed behind and parted from him. </span>
      <span id="f0434"> He pondered about this sensation, which filled him completely, as he was slowly walking along. </span>
      <span id="f0435"> He pondered deeply, like diving into a deep water he let himself sink down to the ground of the sensation, down to the place where the causes lie, because to identify the causes, so it seemed to him, is the very essence of thinking, and by this alone sensations turn into realizations and are not lost, but become entities and start to emit like rays of light what is inside of them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0436">Slowly walking along, Siddhartha pondered. </span>
      <span id="f0437"> He realized that he was no youth any more, but had turned into a man. </span>
      <span id="f0438"> He realized that one thing had left him, as a snake is left by its old skin, that one thing no longer existed in him, which had accompanied him throughout his youth and used to be a part of him: the wish to have teachers and to listen to teachings. </span>
      <span id="f0439"> He had also left the last teacher who had appeared on his path, even him, the highest and wisest teacher, the most holy one, Buddha, he had left him, had to part with him, was not able to accept his teachings.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0440">Slower, he walked along in his thoughts and asked himself:  &#34;But what is this, what you have sought to learn from teachings and from teachers, and what they, who have taught you much, were still unable to teach you?&#34;  And he found:  &#34;It was the self, the purpose and essence of which I sought to learn. </span>
      <span id="f0441"> It was the self, I wanted to free myself from, which I sought to overcome. </span>
      <span id="f0442"> But I was not able to overcome it, could only deceive it, could only flee from it, only hide from it. </span>
      <span id="f0443"> Truly, no thing in this world has kept my thoughts thus busy, as this my very own self, this mystery of me being alive, of me being one and being separated and isolated from all others, of me being Siddhartha! </span>
      <span id="f0444"> And there is no thing in this world I know less about than about me, about Siddhartha!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0445">Having been pondering while slowly walking along, he now stopped as these thoughts caught hold of him, and right away another thought sprang forth from these, a new thought, which was:  &#34;That I know nothing about myself, that Siddhartha has remained thus alien and unknown to me, stems from one cause, a single cause:  I was afraid of myself, I was fleeing from myself! </span>
      <span id="f0446"> I searched Atman, I searched Brahman, I was willing to dissect my self and peel off all of its layers, to find the core of all peels in its unknown interior, the Atman, life, the divine part, the ultimate part. </span>
      <span id="f0447"> But I have lost myself in the process.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0448">Siddhartha opened his eyes and looked around, a smile filled his face and a feeling of awakening from long dreams flowed through him from his head down to his toes. </span>
      <span id="f0449"> And it was not long before he walked again, walked quickly like a man who knows what he has got to do.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0450">&#34;Oh,&#34; he thought, taking a deep breath, &#34;now I would not let Siddhartha escape from me again! </span>
      <span id="f0451"> No longer, I want to begin my thoughts and my life with Atman and with the suffering of the world. </span>
      <span id="f0452"> I do not want to kill and dissect myself any longer, to find a secret behind the ruins. </span>
      <span id="f0453">Neither Yoga-Veda shall teach me any more, nor Atharva-Veda, nor the ascetics, nor any kind of teachings. </span>
      <span id="f0454"> I want to learn from myself, want to be my student, want to get to know myself, the secret of Siddhartha.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0455">He looked around, as if he was seeing the world for the first time. </span>
      <span id="f0456">Beautiful was the world, colourful was the world, strange and mysterious was the world! </span>
      <span id="f0457"> Here was blue, here was yellow, here was green, the sky and the river flowed, the forest and the mountains were rigid, all of it was beautiful, all of it was mysterious and magical, and in its midst was he, Siddhartha, the awakening one, on the path to himself. </span>
      <span id="f0458"> All of this, all this yellow and blue, river and forest, entered Siddhartha for the first time through the eyes, was no longer a spell of Mara, was no longer the veil of Maya, was no longer a pointless and coincidental diversity of mere appearances, despicable to the deeply thinking Brahman, who scorns diversity, who seeks unity. </span>
      <span id="f0459"> Blue was blue, river was river, and if also in the blue and the river, in Siddhartha, the singular and divine lived hidden, so it was still that very divinity&#39;s way and purpose, to be here yellow, here blue, there sky, there forest, and here Siddhartha. </span>
      <span id="f0460"> The purpose and the essential properties were not somewhere behind the things, they were in them, in everything.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0461">&#34;How deaf and stupid have I been!&#34; he thought, walking swiftly along. </span>
      <span id="f0462">&#34;When someone reads a text, wants to discover its meaning, he will not scorn the symbols and letters and call them deceptions, coincidence, and worthless hull, but he will read them, he will study and love them, letter by letter. </span>
      <span id="f0463"> But I, who wanted to read the book of the world and the book of my own being, I have, for the sake of a meaning I had anticipated before I read, scorned the symbols and letters, I called the visible world a deception, called my eyes and my tongue coincidental and worthless forms without substance. </span>
      <span id="f0464"> No, this is over, I have awakened, I have indeed awakened and have not been born before this very day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0465">In thinking these thoughts, Siddhartha stopped once again, suddenly, as if there was a snake lying in front of him on the path.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0466">Because suddenly, he had also become aware of this:  He, who was indeed like someone who had just woken up or like a new-born baby, he had to start his life anew and start again at the very beginning. </span>
      <span id="f0467"> When he had left in this very morning from the grove Jetavana, the grove of that exalted one, already awakening, already on the path towards himself, he had every intention, regarded as natural and took for granted, that he, after years as an ascetic, would return to his home and his father. </span>
      <span id="f0468">But now, only in this moment, when he stopped as if a snake was lying on his path, he also awoke to this realization:  &#34;But I am no longer the one I was, I am no ascetic any more, I am not a priest any more, I am no Brahman any more. </span>
      <span id="f0469"> Whatever should I do at home and at my father&#39;s place? </span>
      <span id="f0470"> Study? </span>
      <span id="f0471"> Make offerings? </span>
      <span id="f0472"> Practise meditation? </span>
      <span id="f0473"> But all this is over, all of this is no longer alongside my path.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0474">Motionless, Siddhartha remained standing there, and for the time of one moment and breath, his heart felt cold, he felt a cold in his chest, as a small animal, a bird or a rabbit, would when seeing how alone he was. </span>
      <span id="f0475"> For many years, he had been without home and had felt nothing. </span>
      <span id="f0476">Now, he felt it. </span>
      <span id="f0477"> Still, even in the deepest meditation, he had been his father&#39;s son, had been a Brahman, of a high caste, a cleric. </span>
      <span id="f0478"> Now, he was nothing but Siddhartha, the awoken one, nothing else was left. </span>
      <span id="f0479">Deeply, he inhaled, and for a moment, he felt cold and shivered. </span>
      <span id="f0480">Nobody was thus alone as he was. </span>
      <span id="f0481"> There was no nobleman who did not belong to the noblemen, no worker that did not belong to the workers, and found refuge with them, shared their life, spoke their language. </span>
      <span id="f0482">No Brahman, who would not be regarded as Brahmans and lived with them, no ascetic who would not find his refuge in the caste of the Samanas, and even the most forlorn hermit in the forest was not just one and alone, he was also surrounded by a place he belonged to, he also belonged to a caste, in which he was at home. </span>
      <span id="f0483"> Govinda had become a monk, and a thousand monks were his brothers, wore the same robe as he, believed in his faith, spoke his language. </span>
      <span id="f0484"> But he, Siddhartha, where did he belong to? </span>
      <span id="f0485"> With whom would he share his life? </span>
      <span id="f0486"> Whose language would he speak?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0487">Out of this moment, when the world melted away all around him, when he stood alone like a star in the sky, out of this moment of a cold and despair, Siddhartha emerged, more a self than before, more firmly concentrated. </span>
      <span id="f0488"> He felt:  This had been the last tremor of the awakening, the last struggle of this birth. </span>
      <span id="f0489"> And it was not long until he walked again in long strides, started to proceed swiftly and impatiently, heading no longer for home, no longer to his father, no longer back.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>