<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0492">KAMALA</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0493">Siddhartha learned something new on every step of his path, for the world was transformed, and his heart was enchanted. </span>
      <span id="f0494"> He saw the sun rising over the mountains with their forests and setting over the distant beach with its palm-trees. </span>
      <span id="f0495"> At night, he saw the stars in the sky in their fixed positions and the crescent of the moon floating like a boat in the blue. </span>
      <span id="f0496"> He saw trees, stars, animals, clouds, rainbows, rocks, herbs, flowers, stream and river, the glistening dew in the bushes in the morning, distant high mountains which were blue and pale, birds sang and bees, wind silverishly blew through the rice-field. </span>
      <span id="f0497">All of this, a thousand-fold and colourful, had always been there, always the sun and the moon had shone, always rivers had roared and bees had buzzed, but in former times all of this had been nothing more to Siddhartha than a fleeting, deceptive veil before his eyes, looked upon in distrust, destined to be penetrated and destroyed by thought, since it was not the essential existence, since this essence lay beyond, on the other side of, the visible. </span>
      <span id="f0498"> But now, his liberated eyes stayed on this side, he saw and became aware of the visible, sought to be at home in this world, did not search for the true essence, did not aim at a world beyond. </span>
      <span id="f0499"> Beautiful was this world, looking at it thus, without searching, thus simply, thus childlike. </span>
      <span id="f0500"> Beautiful were the moon and the stars, beautiful was the stream and the banks, the forest and the rocks, the goat and the gold-beetle, the flower and the butterfly. </span>
      <span id="f0501">Beautiful and lovely it was, thus to walk through the world, thus childlike, thus awoken, thus open to what is near, thus without distrust. </span>
      <span id="f0502"> Differently the sun burnt the head, differently the shade of the forest cooled him down, differently the stream and the cistern, the pumpkin and the banana tasted. </span>
      <span id="f0503"> Short were the days, short the nights, every hour sped swiftly away like a sail on the sea, and under the sail was a ship full of treasures, full of joy. </span>
      <span id="f0504"> Siddhartha saw a group of apes moving through the high canopy of the forest, high in the branches, and heard their savage, greedy song. </span>
      <span id="f0505"> Siddhartha saw a male sheep following a female one and mating with her. </span>
      <span id="f0506"> In a lake of reeds, he saw the pike hungrily hunting for its dinner; propelling themselves away from it, in fear, wiggling and sparkling, the young fish jumped in droves out of the water; the scent of strength and passion came forcefully out of the hasty eddies of the water, which the pike stirred up, impetuously hunting.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0507">All of this had always existed, and he had not seen it; he had not been with it. </span>
      <span id="f0508"> Now he was with it, he was part of it. </span>
      <span id="f0509"> Light and shadow ran through his eyes, stars and moon ran through his heart.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0510">On the way, Siddhartha also remembered everything he had experienced in the Garden Jetavana, the teaching he had heard there, the divine Buddha, the farewell from Govinda, the conversation with the exalted one. </span>
      <span id="f0511"> Again he remembered his own words, he had spoken to the exalted one, every word, and with astonishment he became aware of the fact that there he had said things which he had not really known yet at this time. </span>
      <span id="f0512"> What he had said to Gotama: his, the Buddha&#39;s, treasure and secret was not the teachings, but the unexpressable and not teachable, which he had experienced in the hour of his enlightenment--it was nothing but this very thing which he had now gone to experience, what he now began to experience. </span>
      <span id="f0513"> Now, he had to experience his self. </span>
      <span id="f0514"> It is true that he had already known for a long time that his self was Atman, in its essence bearing the same eternal characteristics as Brahman. </span>
      <span id="f0515"> But never, he had really found this self, because he had wanted to capture it in the net of thought. </span>
      <span id="f0516"> With the body definitely not being the self, and not the spectacle of the senses, so it also was not the thought, not the rational mind, not the learned wisdom, not the learned ability to draw conclusions and to develop previous thoughts in to new ones. </span>
      <span id="f0517"> No, this world of thought was also still on this side, and nothing could be achieved by killing the random self of the senses, if the random self of thoughts and learned knowledge was fattened on the other hand. </span>
      <span id="f0518"> Both, the thoughts as well as the senses, were pretty things, the ultimate meaning was hidden behind both of them, both had to be listened to, both had to be played with, both neither had to be scorned nor overestimated, from both the secret voices of the innermost truth had to be attentively perceived. </span>
      <span id="f0519"> He wanted to strive for nothing, except for what the voice commanded him to strive for, dwell on nothing, except where the voice would advise him to do so. </span>
      <span id="f0520"> Why had Gotama, at that time, in the hour of all hours, sat down under the bo-tree, where the enlightenment hit him? </span>
      <span id="f0521"> He had heard a voice, a voice in his own heart, which had commanded him to seek rest under this tree, and he had neither preferred self-castigation, offerings, ablutions, nor prayer, neither food nor drink, neither sleep nor dream, he had obeyed the voice. </span>
      <span id="f0522"> To obey like this, not to an external command, only to the voice, to be ready like this, this was good, this was necessary, nothing else was necessary.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0523">In the night when he slept in the straw hut of a ferryman by the river, Siddhartha had a dream:  Govinda was standing in front of him, dressed in the yellow robe of an ascetic. </span>
      <span id="f0524"> Sad was how Govinda looked like, sadly he asked:  Why have you forsaken me? </span>
      <span id="f0525"> At this, he embraced Govinda, wrapped his arms around him, and as he was pulling him close to his chest and kissed him, it was not Govinda any more, but a woman, and a full breast popped out of the woman&#39;s dress, at which Siddhartha lay and drank, sweetly and strongly tasted the milk from this breast. </span>
      <span id="f0526">It tasted of woman and man, of sun and forest, of animal and flower, of every fruit, of every joyful desire. </span>
      <span id="f0527"> It intoxicated him and rendered him unconscious.--When Siddhartha woke up, the pale river shimmered through the door of the hut, and in the forest, a dark call of an owl resounded deeply and pleasantly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0528">When the day began, Siddhartha asked his host, the ferryman, to get him across the river. </span>
      <span id="f0529"> The ferryman got him across the river on his bamboo-raft, the wide water shimmered reddishly in the light of the morning.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0530">&#34;This is a beautiful river,&#34; he said to his companion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0531">&#34;Yes,&#34; said the ferryman, &#34;a very beautiful river, I love it more than anything. </span>
      <span id="f0532"> Often I have listened to it, often I have looked into its eyes, and always I have learned from it. </span>
      <span id="f0533"> Much can be learned from a river.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0534">&#34;I thank you, my benefactor,&#34; spoke Siddhartha, disembarking on the other side of the river. </span>
      <span id="f0535"> &#34;I have no gift I could give you for your hospitality, my dear, and also no payment for your work. </span>
      <span id="f0536"> I am a man without a home, a son of a Brahman and a Samana.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0537">&#34;I did see it,&#34; spoke the ferryman, &#34;and I haven&#39;t expected any payment from you and no gift which would be the custom for guests to bear. </span>
      <span id="f0538"> You will give me the gift another time.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0539">&#34;Do you think so?&#34; asked Siddhartha amusedly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0540">&#34;Surely. </span>
      <span id="f0541"> This too, I have learned from the river: everything is coming back! </span>
      <span id="f0542"> You too, Samana, will come back. </span>
      <span id="f0543"> Now farewell! </span>
      <span id="f0544"> Let your friendship be my reward. </span>
      <span id="f0545"> Commemorate me, when you&#39;ll make offerings to the gods.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0546">Smiling, they parted. </span>
      <span id="f0547"> Smiling, Siddhartha was happy about the friendship and the kindness of the ferryman. </span>
      <span id="f0548"> &#34;He is like Govinda,&#34; he thought with a smile, &#34;all I meet on my path are like Govinda. </span>
      <span id="f0549"> All are thankful, though they are the ones who would have a right to receive thanks. </span>
      <span id="f0550"> All are submissive, all would like to be friends, like to obey, think little. </span>
      <span id="f0551"> Like children are all people.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0552">At about noon, he came through a village. </span>
      <span id="f0553"> In front of the mud cottages, children were rolling about in the street, were playing with pumpkin-seeds and sea-shells, screamed and wrestled, but they all timidly fled from the unknown Samana. </span>
      <span id="f0554"> In the end of the village, the path led through a stream, and by the side of the stream, a young woman was kneeling and washing clothes. </span>
      <span id="f0555"> When Siddhartha greeted her, she lifted her head and looked up to him with a smile, so that he saw the white in her eyes glistening. </span>
      <span id="f0556"> He called out a blessing to her, as it is the custom among travellers, and asked how far he still had to go to reach the large city. </span>
      <span id="f0557"> Then she got up and came to him, beautifully her wet mouth was shimmering in her young face. </span>
      <span id="f0558"> She exchanged humorous banter with him, asked whether he had eaten already, and whether it was true that the Samanas slept alone in the forest at night and were not allowed to have any women with them. </span>
      <span id="f0559"> While talking, she put her left foot on his right one and made a movement as a woman does who would want to initiate that kind of sexual pleasure with a man, which the textbooks call &#34;climbing a tree&#34;. </span>
      <span id="f0560"> Siddhartha felt his blood heating up, and since in this moment he had to think of his dream again, he bend slightly down to the woman and kissed with his lips the brown nipple of her breast. </span>
      <span id="f0561"> Looking up, he saw her face smiling full of lust and her eyes, with contracted pupils, begging with desire.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0562">Siddhartha also felt desire and felt the source of his sexuality moving; but since he had never touched a woman before, he hesitated for a moment, while his hands were already prepared to reach out for her. </span>
      <span id="f0563"> And in this moment he heard, shuddering with awe, the voice of his innermost self, and this voice said No. </span>
      <span id="f0564"> Then, all charms disappeared from the young woman&#39;s smiling face, he no longer saw anything else but the damp glance of a female animal in heat. </span>
      <span id="f0565"> Politely, he petted her cheek, turned away from her and disappeared away from the disappointed woman with light steps into the bamboo-wood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0566">On this day, he reached the large city before the evening, and was happy, for he felt the need to be among people. </span>
      <span id="f0567"> For a long time, he had lived in the forests, and the straw hut of the ferryman, in which he had slept that night, had been the first roof for a long time he has had over his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0568">Before the city, in a beautifully fenced grove, the traveller came across a small group of servants, both male and female, carrying baskets. </span>
      <span id="f0569"> In their midst, carried by four servants in an ornamental sedan-chair, sat a woman, the mistress, on red pillows under a colourful canopy. </span>
      <span id="f0570"> Siddhartha stopped at the entrance to the pleasure-garden and watched the parade, saw the servants, the maids, the baskets, saw the sedan-chair and saw the lady in it. </span>
      <span id="f0571"> Under black hair, which made to tower high on her head, he saw a very fair, very delicate, very smart face, a brightly red mouth, like a freshly cracked fig, eyebrows which were well tended and painted in a high arch, smart and watchful dark eyes, a clear, tall neck rising from a green and golden garment, resting fair hands, long and thin, with wide golden bracelets over the wrists.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0572">Siddhartha saw how beautiful she was, and his heart rejoiced. </span>
      <span id="f0573"> He bowed deeply, when the sedan-chair came closer, and straightening up again, he looked at the fair, charming face, read for a moment in the smart eyes with the high arcs above, breathed in a slight fragrant, he did not know. </span>
      <span id="f0574"> With a smile, the beautiful women nodded for a moment and disappeared into the grove, and then the servant as well.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0575">Thus I am entering this city, Siddhartha thought, with a charming omen. </span>
      <span id="f0576">He instantly felt drawn into the grove, but he thought about it, and only now he became aware of how the servants and maids had looked at him at the entrance, how despicable, how distrustful, how rejecting.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0577">I am still a Samana, he thought, I am still an ascetic and beggar. </span>
      <span id="f0578"> I must not remain like this, I will not be able to enter the grove like this. </span>
      <span id="f0579"> And he laughed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0580">The next person who came along this path he asked about the grove and for the name of the woman, and was told that this was the grove of Kamala, the famous courtesan, and that, aside from the grove, she owned a house in the city.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0581">Then, he entered the city. </span>
      <span id="f0582"> Now he had a goal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0583">Pursuing his goal, he allowed the city to suck him in, drifted through the flow of the streets, stood still on the squares, rested on the stairs of stone by the river. </span>
      <span id="f0584"> When the evening came, he made friends with barber&#39;s assistant, whom he had seen working in the shade of an arch in a building, whom he found again praying in a temple of Vishnu, whom he told about stories of Vishnu and the Lakshmi. </span>
      <span id="f0585"> Among the boats by the river, he slept this night, and early in the morning, before the first customers came into his shop, he had the barber&#39;s assistant shave his beard and cut his hair, comb his hair and anoint it with fine oil. </span>
      <span id="f0586">Then he went to take his bath in the river.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0587">When late in the afternoon, beautiful Kamala approached her grove in her sedan-chair, Siddhartha was standing at the entrance, made a bow and received the courtesan&#39;s greeting. </span>
      <span id="f0588"> But that servant who walked at the very end of her train he motioned to him and asked him to inform his mistress that a young Brahman would wish to talk to her. </span>
      <span id="f0589"> After a while, the servant returned, asked him, who had been waiting, to follow him conducted him, who was following him, without a word into a pavilion, where Kamala was lying on a couch, and left him alone with her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0590">&#34;Weren&#39;t you already standing out there yesterday, greeting me?&#34; asked Kamala.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0591">&#34;It&#39;s true that I&#39;ve already seen and greeted you yesterday.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0592">&#34;But didn&#39;t you yesterday wear a beard, and long hair, and dust in your hair?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0593">&#34;You have observed well, you have seen everything. </span>
      <span id="f0594"> You have seen Siddhartha, the son of a Brahman, who has left his home to become a Samana, and who has been a Samana for three years. </span>
      <span id="f0595"> But now, I have left that path and came into this city, and the first one I met, even before I had entered the city, was you. </span>
      <span id="f0596"> To say this, I have come to you, oh Kamala! </span>
      <span id="f0597"> You are the first woman whom Siddhartha is not addressing with his eyes turned to the ground. </span>
      <span id="f0598"> Never again I want to turn my eyes to the ground, when I&#39;m coming across a beautiful woman.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0599">Kamala smiled and played with her fan of peacocks&#39; feathers. </span>
      <span id="f0600"> And asked: &#34;And only to tell me this, Siddhartha has come to me?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0601">&#34;To tell you this and to thank you for being so beautiful. </span>
      <span id="f0602"> And if it doesn&#39;t displease you, Kamala, I would like to ask you to be my friend and teacher, for I know nothing yet of that art which you have mastered in the highest degree.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0603">At this, Kamala laughed aloud.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0604">&#34;Never before this has happened to me, my friend, that a Samana from the forest came to me and wanted to learn from me! </span>
      <span id="f0605"> Never before this has happened to me, that a Samana came to me with long hair and an old, torn loin-cloth! </span>
      <span id="f0606"> Many young men come to me, and there are also sons of Brahmans among them, but they come in beautiful clothes, they come in fine shoes, they have perfume in their hair and money in their pouches. </span>
      <span id="f0607">This is, oh Samana, how the young men are like who come to me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0608">Quoth Siddhartha:  &#34;Already I am starting to learn from you. </span>
      <span id="f0609"> Even yesterday, I was already learning. </span>
      <span id="f0610"> I have already taken off my beard, have combed the hair, have oil in my hair. </span>
      <span id="f0611"> There is little which is still missing in me, oh excellent one: fine clothes, fine shoes, money in my pouch. </span>
      <span id="f0612"> You shall know, Siddhartha has set harder goals for himself than such trifles, and he has reached them. </span>
      <span id="f0613"> How shouldn&#39;t I reach that goal, which I have set for myself yesterday:  to be your friend and to learn the joys of love from you! </span>
      <span id="f0614"> You&#39;ll see that I&#39;ll learn quickly, Kamala, I have already learned harder things than what you&#39;re supposed to teach me. </span>
      <span id="f0615"> And now let&#39;s get to it: You aren&#39;t satisfied with Siddhartha as he is, with oil in his hair, but without clothes, without shoes, without money?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0616">Laughing, Kamala exclaimed:  &#34;No, my dear, he doesn&#39;t satisfy me yet. </span>
      <span id="f0617">Clothes are what he must have, pretty clothes, and shoes, pretty shoes, and lots of money in his pouch, and gifts for Kamala. </span>
      <span id="f0618"> Do you know it now, Samana from the forest? </span>
      <span id="f0619"> Did you mark my words?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0620">&#34;Yes, I have marked your words,&#34; Siddhartha exclaimed. </span>
      <span id="f0621"> &#34;How should I not mark words which are coming from such a mouth! </span>
      <span id="f0622"> Your mouth is like a freshly cracked fig, Kamala. </span>
      <span id="f0623"> My mouth is red and fresh as well, it will be a suitable match for yours, you&#39;ll see.--But tell me, beautiful Kamala, aren&#39;t you at all afraid of the Samana from the forest, who has come to learn how to make love?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0624">&#34;Whatever for should I be afraid of a Samana, a stupid Samana from the forest, who is coming from the jackals and doesn&#39;t even know yet what women are?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0625">&#34;Oh, he&#39;s strong, the Samana, and he isn&#39;t afraid of anything. </span>
      <span id="f0626"> He could force you, beautiful girl. </span>
      <span id="f0627"> He could kidnap you. </span>
      <span id="f0628"> He could hurt you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0629">&#34;No, Samana, I am not afraid of this. </span>
      <span id="f0630"> Did any Samana or Brahman ever fear, someone might come and grab him and steal his learning, and his religious devotion, and his depth of thought? </span>
      <span id="f0631"> No, for they are his very own, and he would only give away from those whatever he is willing to give and to whomever he is willing to give. </span>
      <span id="f0632"> Like this it is, precisely like this it is also with Kamala and with the pleasures of love. </span>
      <span id="f0633">Beautiful and red is Kamala&#39;s mouth, but just try to kiss it against Kamala&#39;s will, and you will not obtain a single drop of sweetness from it, which knows how to give so many sweet things! </span>
      <span id="f0634"> You are learning easily, Siddhartha, thus you should also learn this: love can be obtained by begging, buying, receiving it as a gift, finding it in the street, but it cannot be stolen. </span>
      <span id="f0635"> In this, you have come up with the wrong path. </span>
      <span id="f0636"> No, it would be a pity, if a pretty young man like you would want to tackle it in such a wrong manner.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0637">Siddhartha bowed with a smile. </span>
      <span id="f0638"> &#34;It would be a pity, Kamala, you are so right! </span>
      <span id="f0639"> It would be such a great pity. </span>
      <span id="f0640"> No, I shall not lose a single drop of sweetness from your mouth, nor you from mine! </span>
      <span id="f0641"> So it is settled: Siddhartha will return, once he&#39;ll have what he still lacks: clothes, shoes, money. </span>
      <span id="f0642"> But speak, lovely Kamala, couldn&#39;t you still give me one small advice?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0643">&#34;An advice? </span>
      <span id="f0644"> Why not? </span>
      <span id="f0645"> Who wouldn&#39;t like to give an advice to a poor, ignorant Samana, who is coming from the jackals of the forest?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0646">&#34;Dear Kamala, thus advise me where I should go to, that I&#39;ll find these three things most quickly?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0647">&#34;Friend, many would like to know this. </span>
      <span id="f0648"> You must do what you&#39;ve learned and ask for money, clothes, and shoes in return. </span>
      <span id="f0649"> There is no other way for a poor man to obtain money. </span>
      <span id="f0650"> What might you be able to do?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0651">&#34;I can think. </span>
      <span id="f0652"> I can wait. </span>
      <span id="f0653"> I can fast.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0654">&#34;Nothing else?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0655">&#34;Nothing. </span>
      <span id="f0656"> But yes, I can also write poetry. </span>
      <span id="f0657"> Would you like to give me a kiss for a poem?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0658">&#34;I would like to, if I&#39;ll like your poem. </span>
      <span id="f0659"> What would be its title?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0660">Siddhartha spoke, after he had thought about it for a moment, these verses:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0661">Into her shady grove stepped the pretty Kamala, At the grove&#39;s entrance stood the brown Samana. </span>
      <span id="f0662">Deeply, seeing the lotus&#39;s blossom, Bowed that man, and smiling Kamala thanked. </span>
      <span id="f0663">More lovely, thought the young man, than offerings for gods, More lovely is offering to pretty Kamala.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0664">Kamala loudly clapped her hands, so that the golden bracelets clanged.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0665">&#34;Beautiful are your verses, oh brown Samana, and truly, I&#39;m losing nothing when I&#39;m giving you a kiss for them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0666">She beckoned him with her eyes, he tilted his head so that his face touched hers and placed his mouth on that mouth which was like a freshly cracked fig. </span>
      <span id="f0667"> For a long time, Kamala kissed him, and with a deep astonishment Siddhartha felt how she taught him, how wise she was, how she controlled him, rejected him, lured him, and how after this first one there was to be a long, a well ordered, well tested sequence of kisses, everyone different from the others, he was still to receive. </span>
      <span id="f0668">Breathing deeply, he remained standing where he was, and was in this moment astonished like a child about the cornucopia of knowledge and things worth learning, which revealed itself before his eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0669">&#34;Very beautiful are your verses,&#34; exclaimed Kamala, &#34;if I was rich, I would give you pieces of gold for them. </span>
      <span id="f0670"> But it will be difficult for you to earn thus much money with verses as you need. </span>
      <span id="f0671"> For you need a lot of money, if you want to be Kamala&#39;s friend.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0672">&#34;The way you&#39;re able to kiss, Kamala!&#34; stammered Siddhartha.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0673">&#34;Yes, this I am able to do, therefore I do not lack clothes, shoes, bracelets, and all beautiful things. </span>
      <span id="f0674"> But what will become of you? </span>
      <span id="f0675">Aren&#39;t you able to do anything else but thinking, fasting, making poetry?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0676">&#34;I also know the sacrificial songs,&#34; said Siddhartha, &#34;but I do not want to sing them any more. </span>
      <span id="f0677"> I also know magic spells, but I do not want to speak them any more. </span>
      <span id="f0678"> I have read the scriptures--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0679">&#34;Stop,&#34; Kamala interrupted him. </span>
      <span id="f0680"> &#34;You&#39;re able to read? </span>
      <span id="f0681"> And write?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0682">&#34;Certainly, I can do this. </span>
      <span id="f0683"> Many people can do this.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0684">&#34;Most people can&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f0685"> I also can&#39;t do it. </span>
      <span id="f0686"> It is very good that you&#39;re able to read and write, very good. </span>
      <span id="f0687"> You will also still find use for the magic spells.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0688">In this moment, a maid came running in and whispered a message into her mistress&#39;s ear.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0689">&#34;There&#39;s a visitor for me,&#34; exclaimed Kamala. </span>
      <span id="f0690"> &#34;Hurry and get yourself away, Siddhartha, nobody may see you in here, remember this! </span>
      <span id="f0691"> Tomorrow, I&#39;ll see you again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0692">But to the maid she gave the order to give the pious Brahman white upper garments. </span>
      <span id="f0693"> Without fully understanding what was happening to him, Siddhartha found himself being dragged away by the maid, brought into a garden-house avoiding the direct path, being given upper garments as a gift, led into the bushes, and urgently admonished to get himself out of the grove as soon as possible without being seen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0694">Contently, he did as he had been told. </span>
      <span id="f0695"> Being accustomed to the forest, he managed to get out of the grove and over the hedge without making a sound. </span>
      <span id="f0696"> Contently, he returned to the city, carrying the rolled up garments under his arm. </span>
      <span id="f0697"> At the inn, where travellers stay, he positioned himself by the door, without words he asked for food, without a word he accepted a piece of rice-cake. </span>
      <span id="f0698"> Perhaps as soon as tomorrow, he thought, I will ask no one for food any more.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0699">Suddenly, pride flared up in him. </span>
      <span id="f0700"> He was no Samana any more, it was no longer becoming to him to beg. </span>
      <span id="f0701"> He gave the rice-cake to a dog and remained without food.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0702">&#34;Simple is the life which people lead in this world here,&#34; thought Siddhartha. </span>
      <span id="f0703"> &#34;It presents no difficulties. </span>
      <span id="f0704"> Everything was difficult, toilsome, and ultimately hopeless, when I was still a Samana. </span>
      <span id="f0705"> Now, everything is easy, easy like that lessons in kissing, which Kamala is giving me. </span>
      <span id="f0706"> I need clothes and money, nothing else; this a small, near goals, they won&#39;t make a person lose any sleep.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0707">He had already discovered Kamala&#39;s house in the city long before, there he turned up the following day.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0708">&#34;Things are working out well,&#34; she called out to him. </span>
      <span id="f0709"> &#34;They are expecting you at Kamaswami&#39;s, he is the richest merchant of the city. </span>
      <span id="f0710">If he&#39;ll like you, he&#39;ll accept you into his service. </span>
      <span id="f0711"> Be smart, brown Samana. </span>
      <span id="f0712"> I had others tell him about you. </span>
      <span id="f0713"> Be polite towards him, he is very powerful. </span>
      <span id="f0714"> But don&#39;t be too modest! </span>
      <span id="f0715"> I do not want you to become his servant, you shall become his equal, or else I won&#39;t be satisfied with you. </span>
      <span id="f0716"> Kamaswami is starting to get old and lazy. </span>
      <span id="f0717"> If he&#39;ll like you, he&#39;ll entrust you with a lot.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0718">Siddhartha thanked her and laughed, and when she found out that he had not eaten anything yesterday and today, she sent for bread and fruits and treated him to it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0719">&#34;You&#39;ve been lucky,&#34; she said when they parted, &#34;I&#39;m opening one door after another for you. </span>
      <span id="f0720"> How come? </span>
      <span id="f0721"> Do you have a spell?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0722">Siddhartha said:  &#34;Yesterday, I told you I knew how to think, to wait, and to fast, but you thought this was of no use. </span>
      <span id="f0723"> But it is useful for many things, Kamala, you&#39;ll see. </span>
      <span id="f0724"> You&#39;ll see that the stupid Samanas are learning and able to do many pretty things in the forest, which the likes of you aren&#39;t capable of. </span>
      <span id="f0725"> The day before yesterday, I was still a shaggy beggar, as soon as yesterday I have kissed Kamala, and soon I&#39;ll be a merchant and have money and all those things you insist upon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0726">&#34;Well yes,&#34; she admitted. </span>
      <span id="f0727"> &#34;But where would you be without me? </span>
      <span id="f0728"> What would you be, if Kamala wasn&#39;t helping you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0729">&#34;Dear Kamala,&#34; said Siddhartha and straightened up to his full height, &#34;when I came to you into your grove, I did the first step. </span>
      <span id="f0730"> It was my resolution to learn love from this most beautiful woman. </span>
      <span id="f0731"> From that moment on when I had made this resolution, I also knew that I would carry it out. </span>
      <span id="f0732"> I knew that you would help me, at your first glance at the entrance of the grove I already knew it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0733">&#34;But what if I hadn&#39;t been willing?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0734">&#34;You were willing. </span>
      <span id="f0735"> Look, Kamala:  When you throw a rock into the water, it will speed on the fastest course to the bottom of the water. </span>
      <span id="f0736"> This is how it is when Siddhartha has a goal, a resolution. </span>
      <span id="f0737"> Siddhartha does nothing, he waits, he thinks, he fasts, but he passes through the things of the world like a rock through water, without doing anything, without stirring; he is drawn, he lets himself fall. </span>
      <span id="f0738"> His goal attracts him, because he doesn&#39;t let anything enter his soul which might oppose the goal. </span>
      <span id="f0739"> This is what Siddhartha has learned among the Samanas. </span>
      <span id="f0740"> This is what fools call magic and of which they think it would be effected by means of the daemons. </span>
      <span id="f0741"> Nothing is effected by daemons, there are no daemons. </span>
      <span id="f0742"> Everyone can perform magic, everyone can reach his goals, if he is able to think, if he is able to wait, if he is able to fast.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0743">Kamala listened to him. </span>
      <span id="f0744"> She loved his voice, she loved the look from his eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0745">&#34;Perhaps it is so,&#34; she said quietly, &#34;as you say, friend. </span>
      <span id="f0746"> But perhaps it is also like this: that Siddhartha is a handsome man, that his glance pleases the women, that therefore good fortune is coming towards him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0747">With one kiss, Siddhartha bid his farewell. </span>
      <span id="f0748"> &#34;I wish that it should be this way, my teacher; that my glance shall please you, that always good fortune shall come to me out of your direction!&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>