<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>WITH THE CHILDLIKE PEOPLE</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0749">WITH THE CHILDLIKE PEOPLE</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0750">Siddhartha went to Kamaswami the merchant, he was directed into a rich house, servants led him between precious carpets into a chamber, where he awaited the master of the house.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0751">Kamaswami entered, a swiftly, smoothly moving man with very gray hair, with very intelligent, cautious eyes, with a greedy mouth. </span>
      <span id="f0752"> Politely, the host and the guest greeted one another.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0753">&#34;I have been told,&#34; the merchant began, &#34;that you were a Brahman, a learned man, but that you seek to be in the service of a merchant. </span>
      <span id="f0754">Might you have become destitute, Brahman, so that you seek to serve?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0755">&#34;No,&#34; said Siddhartha, &#34;I have not become destitute and have never been destitute. </span>
      <span id="f0756"> You should know that I&#39;m coming from the Samanas, with whom I have lived for a long time.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0757">&#34;If you&#39;re coming from the Samanas, how could you be anything but destitute? </span>
      <span id="f0758"> Aren&#39;t the Samanas entirely without possessions?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0759">&#34;I am without possessions,&#34; said Siddhartha, &#34;if this is what you mean. </span>
      <span id="f0760">Surely, I am without possessions. </span>
      <span id="f0761"> But I am so voluntarily, and therefore I am not destitute.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0762">&#34;But what are you planning to live of, being without possessions?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0763">&#34;I haven&#39;t thought of this yet, sir. </span>
      <span id="f0764"> For more than three years, I have been without possessions, and have never thought about of what I should live.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0765">&#34;So you&#39;ve lived of the possessions of others.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0766">&#34;Presumable this is how it is. </span>
      <span id="f0767"> After all, a merchant also lives of what other people own.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0768">&#34;Well said. </span>
      <span id="f0769"> But he wouldn&#39;t take anything from another person for nothing; he would give his merchandise in return.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0770">&#34;So it seems to be indeed. </span>
      <span id="f0771"> Everyone takes, everyone gives, such is life.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0772">&#34;But if you don&#39;t mind me asking: being without possessions, what would you like to give?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0773">&#34;Everyone gives what he has. </span>
      <span id="f0774"> The warrior gives strength, the merchant gives merchandise, the teacher teachings, the farmer rice, the fisher fish.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0775">&#34;Yes indeed. </span>
      <span id="f0776"> And what is it now what you&#39;ve got to give? </span>
      <span id="f0777"> What is it that you&#39;ve learned, what you&#39;re able to do?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0778">&#34;I can think. </span>
      <span id="f0779"> I can wait. </span>
      <span id="f0780"> I can fast.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0781">&#34;That&#39;s everything?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0782">&#34;I believe, that&#39;s everything!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0783">&#34;And what&#39;s the use of that? </span>
      <span id="f0784"> For example, the fasting--what is it good for?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0785">&#34;It is very good, sir. </span>
      <span id="f0786"> When a person has nothing to eat, fasting is the smartest thing he could do. </span>
      <span id="f0787"> When, for example, Siddhartha hadn&#39;t learned to fast, he would have to accept any kind of service before this day is up, whether it may be with you or wherever, because hunger would force him to do so. </span>
      <span id="f0788"> But like this, Siddhartha can wait calmly, he knows no impatience, he knows no emergency, for a long time he can allow hunger to besiege him and can laugh about it. </span>
      <span id="f0789"> This, sir, is what fasting is good for.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0790">&#34;You&#39;re right, Samana. </span>
      <span id="f0791"> Wait for a moment.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0792">Kamaswami left the room and returned with a scroll, which he handed to his guest while asking:  &#34;Can you read this?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0793">Siddhartha looked at the scroll, on which a sales-contract had been written down, and began to read out its contents.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0794">&#34;Excellent,&#34; said Kamaswami. </span>
      <span id="f0795"> &#34;And would you write something for me on this piece of paper?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0796">He handed him a piece of paper and a pen, and Siddhartha wrote and returned the paper.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0797">Kamaswami read:  &#34;Writing is good, thinking is better. </span>
      <span id="f0798"> Being smart is good, being patient is better.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0799">&#34;It is excellent how you&#39;re able to write,&#34; the merchant praised him. </span>
      <span id="f0800">&#34;Many a thing we will still have to discuss with one another. </span>
      <span id="f0801"> For today, I&#39;m asking you to be my guest and to live in this house.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0802">Siddhartha thanked and accepted, and lived in the dealers house from now on. </span>
      <span id="f0803"> Clothes were brought to him, and shoes, and every day, a servant prepared a bath for him. </span>
      <span id="f0804"> Twice a day, a plentiful meal was served, but Siddhartha only ate once a day, and ate neither meat nor did he drink wine. </span>
      <span id="f0805"> Kamaswami told him about his trade, showed him the merchandise and storage-rooms, showed him calculations. </span>
      <span id="f0806"> Siddhartha got to know many new things, he heard a lot and spoke little. </span>
      <span id="f0807"> And thinking of Kamala&#39;s words, he was never subservient to the merchant, forced him to treat him as an equal, yes even more than an equal. </span>
      <span id="f0808"> Kamaswami conducted his business with care and often with passion, but Siddhartha looked upon all of this as if it was a game, the rules of which he tried hard to learn precisely, but the contents of which did not touch his heart.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0809">He was not in Kamaswami&#39;s house for long, when he already took part in his landlords business. </span>
      <span id="f0810"> But daily, at the hour appointed by her, he visited beautiful Kamala, wearing pretty clothes, fine shoes, and soon he brought her gifts as well. </span>
      <span id="f0811"> Much he learned from her red, smart mouth. </span>
      <span id="f0812"> Much he learned from her tender, supple hand. </span>
      <span id="f0813"> Him, who was, regarding love, still a boy and had a tendency to plunge blindly and insatiably into lust like into a bottomless pit, him she taught, thoroughly starting with the basics, about that school of thought which teaches that pleasure cannot be taken without giving pleasure, and that every gesture, every caress, every touch, every look, every spot of the body, however small it was, had its secret, which would bring happiness to those who know about it and unleash it. </span>
      <span id="f0814"> She taught him, that lovers must not part from one another after celebrating love, without one admiring the other, without being just as defeated as they have been victorious, so that with none of them should start feeling fed up or bored and get that evil feeling of having abused or having been abused. </span>
      <span id="f0815"> Wonderful hours he spent with the beautiful and smart artist, became her student, her lover, her friend. </span>
      <span id="f0816"> Here with Kamala was the worth and purpose of his present life, nt with the business of Kamaswami.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0817">The merchant passed to duties of writing important letters and contracts on to him and got into the habit of discussing all important affairs with him. </span>
      <span id="f0818"> He soon saw that Siddhartha knew little about rice and wool, shipping and trade, but that he acted in a fortunate manner, and that Siddhartha surpassed him, the merchant, in calmness and equanimity, and in the art of listening and deeply understanding previously unknown people. </span>
      <span id="f0819"> &#34;This Brahman,&#34; he said to a friend, &#34;is no proper merchant and will never be one, there is never any passion in his soul when he conducts our business. </span>
      <span id="f0820"> But he has that mysterious quality of those people to whom success comes all by itself, whether this may be a good star of his birth, magic, or something he has learned among Samanas. </span>
      <span id="f0821">He always seems to be merely playing with out business-affairs, they never fully become a part of him, they never rule over him, he is never afraid of failure, he is never upset by a loss.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0822">The friend advised the merchant:  &#34;Give him from the business he conducts for you a third of the profits, but let him also be liable for the same amount of the losses, when there is a loss. </span>
      <span id="f0823"> Then, he&#39;ll become more zealous.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0824">Kamaswami followed the advice. </span>
      <span id="f0825"> But Siddhartha cared little about this. </span>
      <span id="f0826">When he made a profit, he accepted it with equanimity; when he made losses, he laughed and said:  &#34;Well, look at this, so this one turned out badly!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0827">It seemed indeed, as if he did not care about the business. </span>
      <span id="f0828"> At one time, he travelled to a village to buy a large harvest of rice there. </span>
      <span id="f0829">But when he got there, the rice had already been sold to another merchant. </span>
      <span id="f0830"> Nevertheless, Siddhartha stayed for several days in that village, treated the farmers for a drink, gave copper-coins to their children, joined in the celebration of a wedding, and returned extremely satisfied from his trip. </span>
      <span id="f0831"> Kamaswami held against him that he had not turned back right away, that he had wasted time and money. </span>
      <span id="f0832"> Siddhartha answered:  &#34;Stop scolding, dear friend! </span>
      <span id="f0833"> Nothing was ever achieved by scolding. </span>
      <span id="f0834"> If a loss has occurred, let me bear that loss. </span>
      <span id="f0835"> I am very satisfied with this trip. </span>
      <span id="f0836"> I have gotten to know many kinds of people, a Brahman has become my friend, children have sat on my knees, farmers have shown me their fields, nobody knew that I was a merchant.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0837">&#34;That&#39;s all very nice,&#34; exclaimed Kamaswami indignantly, &#34;but in fact, you are a merchant after all, one ought to think! </span>
      <span id="f0838"> Or might you have only travelled for your amusement?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0839">&#34;Surely,&#34; Siddhartha laughed, &#34;surely I have travelled for my amusement. </span>
      <span id="f0840">For what else? </span>
      <span id="f0841"> I have gotten to know people and places, I have received kindness and trust, I have found friendship. </span>
      <span id="f0842"> Look, my dear, if I had been Kamaswami, I would have travelled back, being annoyed and in a hurry, as soon as I had seen that my purchase had been rendered impossible, and time and money would indeed have been lost. </span>
      <span id="f0843"> But like this, I&#39;ve had a few good days, I&#39;ve learned, had joy, I&#39;ve neither harmed myself nor others by annoyance and hastiness. </span>
      <span id="f0844"> And if I&#39;ll ever return there again, perhaps to buy an upcoming harvest, or for whatever purpose it might be, friendly people will receive me in a friendly and happy manner, and I will praise myself for not showing any hurry and displeasure at that time. </span>
      <span id="f0845"> So, leave it as it is, my friend, and don&#39;t harm yourself by scolding! </span>
      <span id="f0846"> If the day will come, when you will see: this Siddhartha is harming me, then speak a word and Siddhartha will go on his own path. </span>
      <span id="f0847"> But until then, let&#39;s be satisfied with one another.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0848">Futile were also the merchant&#39;s attempts, to convince Siddhartha that he should eat his bread. </span>
      <span id="f0849"> Siddhartha ate his own bread, or rather they both ate other people&#39;s bread, all people&#39;s bread. </span>
      <span id="f0850"> Siddhartha never listened to Kamaswami&#39;s worries and Kamaswami had many worries. </span>
      <span id="f0851"> Whether there was a business-deal going on which was in danger of failing, or whether a shipment of merchandise seemed to have been lost, or a debtor seemed to be unable to pay, Kamaswami could never convince his partner that it would be useful to utter a few words of worry or anger, to have wrinkles on the forehead, to sleep badly. </span>
      <span id="f0852"> When, one day, Kamaswami held against him that he had learned everything he knew from him, he replied:  &#34;Would you please not kid me with such jokes! </span>
      <span id="f0853"> What I&#39;ve learned from you is how much a basket of fish costs and how much interests may be charged on loaned money. </span>
      <span id="f0854"> These are your areas of expertise. </span>
      <span id="f0855"> I haven&#39;t learned to think from you, my dear Kamaswami, you ought to be the one seeking to learn from me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0856">Indeed his soul was not with the trade. </span>
      <span id="f0857"> The business was good enough to provide him with the money for Kamala, and it earned him much more than he needed. </span>
      <span id="f0858"> Besides from this, Siddhartha&#39;s interest and curiosity was only concerned with the people, whose businesses, crafts, worries, pleasures, and acts of foolishness used to be as alien and distant to him as the moon. </span>
      <span id="f0859"> However easily he succeeded in talking to all of them, in living with all of them, in learning from all of them, he was still aware that there was something which separated him from them and this separating factor was him being a Samana. </span>
      <span id="f0860"> He saw mankind going through life in a childlike or animallike manner, which he loved and also despised at the same time. </span>
      <span id="f0861"> He saw them toiling, saw them suffering, and becoming gray for the sake of things which seemed to him to entirely unworthy of this price, for money, for little pleasures, for being slightly honoured, he saw them scolding and insulting each other, he saw them complaining about pain at which a Samana would only smile, and suffering because of deprivations which a Samana would not feel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0862">He was open to everything, these people brought his way. </span>
      <span id="f0863"> Welcome was the merchant who offered him linen for sale, welcome was the debtor who sought another loan, welcome was the beggar who told him for one hour the story of his poverty and who was not half as poor as any given Samana. </span>
      <span id="f0864"> He did not treat the rich foreign merchant any different than the servant who shaved him and the street-vendor whom he let cheat him out of some small change when buying bananas. </span>
      <span id="f0865"> When Kamaswami came to him, to complain about his worries or to reproach him concerning his business, he listened curiously and happily, was puzzled by him, tried to understand him, consented that he was a little bit right, only as much as he considered indispensable, and turned away from him, towards the next person who would ask for him. </span>
      <span id="f0866"> And there were many who came to him, many to do business with him, many to cheat him, many to draw some secret out of him, many to appeal to his sympathy, many to get his advice. </span>
      <span id="f0867"> He gave advice, he pitied, he made gifts, he let them cheat him a bit, and this entire game and the passion with which all people played this game occupied his thoughts just as much as the gods and Brahmans used to occupy them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0868">At times he felt, deep in his chest, a dying, quiet voice, which admonished him quietly, lamented quietly; he hardly perceived it. </span>
      <span id="f0869"> And then, for an hour, he became aware of the strange life he was leading, of him doing lots of things which were only a game, of, though being happy and feeling joy at times, real life still passing him by and not touching him. </span>
      <span id="f0870"> As a ball-player plays with his balls, he played with his business-deals, with the people around him, watched them, found amusement in them; with his heart, with the source of his being, he was not with them. </span>
      <span id="f0871"> The source ran somewhere, far away from him, ran and ran invisibly, had nothing to do with his life any more. </span>
      <span id="f0872"> And at several times he suddenly became scared on account of such thoughts and wished that he would also be gifted with the ability to participate in all of this childlike-naive occupations of the daytime with passion and with his heart, really to live, really to act, really to enjoy and to live instead of just standing by as a spectator. </span>
      <span id="f0873"> But again and again, he came back to beautiful Kamala, learned the art of love, practised the cult of lust, in which more than in anything else giving and taking becomes one, chatted with her, learned from her, gave her advice, received advice. </span>
      <span id="f0874"> She understood him better than Govinda used to understand him, she was more similar to him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0875">Once, he said to her:  &#34;You are like me, you are different from most people. </span>
      <span id="f0876"> You are Kamala, nothing else, and inside of you, there is a peace and refuge, to which you can go at every hour of the day and be at home at yourself, as I can also do. </span>
      <span id="f0877"> Few people have this, and yet all could have it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0878">&#34;Not all people are smart,&#34; said Kamala.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0879">&#34;No,&#34; said Siddhartha, &#34;that&#39;s not the reason why. </span>
      <span id="f0880"> Kamaswami is just as smart as I, and still has no refuge in himself. </span>
      <span id="f0881"> Others have it, who are small children with respect to their mind. </span>
      <span id="f0882"> Most people, Kamala, are like a falling leaf, which is blown and is turning around through the air, and wavers, and tumbles to the ground. </span>
      <span id="f0883"> But others, a few, are like stars, they go on a fixed course, no wind reaches them, in themselves they have their law and their course. </span>
      <span id="f0884"> Among all the learned men and Samanas, of which I knew many, there was one of this kind, a perfected one, I&#39;ll never be able to forget him. </span>
      <span id="f0885"> It is that Gotama, the exalted one, who is spreading that teachings. </span>
      <span id="f0886"> Thousands of followers are listening to his teachings every day, follow his instructions every hour, but they are all falling leaves, not in themselves they have teachings and a law.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0887">Kamala looked at him with a smile. </span>
      <span id="f0888"> &#34;Again, you&#39;re talking about him,&#34; she said, &#34;again, you&#39;re having a Samana&#39;s thoughts.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0889">Siddhartha said nothing, and they played the game of love, one of the thirty or forty different games Kamala knew. </span>
      <span id="f0890"> Her body was flexible like that of a jaguar and like the bow of a hunter; he who had learned from her how to make love, was knowledgeable of many forms of lust, many secrets. </span>
      <span id="f0891"> For a long time, she played with Siddhartha, enticed him, rejected him, forced him, embraced him: enjoyed his masterful skills, until he was defeated and rested exhausted by her side.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0892">The courtesan bent over him, took a long look at his face, at his eyes, which had grown tired.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0893">&#34;You are the best lover,&#34; she said thoughtfully, &#34;I ever saw. </span>
      <span id="f0894"> You&#39;re stronger than others, more supple, more willing. </span>
      <span id="f0895"> You&#39;ve learned my art well, Siddhartha. </span>
      <span id="f0896"> At some time, when I&#39;ll be older, I&#39;d want to bear your child. </span>
      <span id="f0897"> And yet, my dear, you&#39;ve remained a Samana, and yet you do not love me, you love nobody. </span>
      <span id="f0898"> Isn&#39;t it so?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0899">&#34;It might very well be so,&#34; Siddhartha said tiredly. </span>
      <span id="f0900"> &#34;I am like you. </span>
      <span id="f0901">You also do not love--how else could you practise love as a craft? </span>
      <span id="f0902">Perhaps, people of our kind can&#39;t love. </span>
      <span id="f0903"> The childlike people can; that&#39;s their secret.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>