<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1009">BY THE RIVER</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1010">Siddhartha walked through the forest, was already far from the city, and knew nothing but that one thing, that there was no going back for him, that this life, as he had lived it for many years until now, was over and done away with, and that he had tasted all of it, sucked everything out of it until he was disgusted with it. </span>
      <span id="f1011"> Dead was the singing bird, he had dreamt of. </span>
      <span id="f1012"> Dead was the bird in his heart. </span>
      <span id="f1013"> Deeply, he had been entangled in Sansara, he had sucked up disgust and death from all sides into his body, like a sponge sucks up water until it is full. </span>
      <span id="f1014"> And full he was, full of the feeling of been sick of it, full of misery, full of death, there was nothing left in this world which could have attracted him, given him joy, given him comfort.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1015">Passionately he wished to know nothing about himself anymore, to have rest, to be dead. </span>
      <span id="f1016"> If there only was a lightning-bolt to strike him dead! </span>
      <span id="f1017"> If there only was a tiger to devour him! </span>
      <span id="f1018"> If there only was a wine, a poison which would numb his senses, bring him forgetfulness and sleep, and no awakening from that! </span>
      <span id="f1019"> Was there still any kind of filth, he had not soiled himself with, a sin or foolish act he had not committed, a dreariness of the soul he had not brought upon himself? </span>
      <span id="f1020">Was it still at all possible to be alive? </span>
      <span id="f1021"> Was it possible, to breathe in again and again, to breathe out, to feel hunger, to eat again, to sleep again, to sleep with a woman again? </span>
      <span id="f1022"> Was this cycle not exhausted and brought to a conclusion for him?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1023">Siddhartha reached the large river in the forest, the same river over which a long time ago, when he had still been a young man and came from the town of Gotama, a ferryman had conducted him. </span>
      <span id="f1024"> By this river he stopped, hesitantly he stood at the bank. </span>
      <span id="f1025"> Tiredness and hunger had weakened him, and whatever for should he walk on, wherever to, to which goal? </span>
      <span id="f1026"> No, there were no more goals, there was nothing left but the deep, painful yearning to shake off this whole desolate dream, to spit out this stale wine, to put an end to this miserable and shameful life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1027">A hang bent over the bank of the river, a coconut-tree; Siddhartha leaned against its trunk with his shoulder, embraced the trunk with one arm, and looked down into the green water, which ran and ran under him, looked down and found himself to be entirely filled with the wish to let go and to drown in these waters. </span>
      <span id="f1028"> A frightening emptiness was reflected back at him by the water, answering to the terrible emptiness in his soul. </span>
      <span id="f1029"> Yes, he had reached the end. </span>
      <span id="f1030"> There was nothing left for him, except to annihilate himself, except to smash the failure into which he had shaped his life, to throw it away, before the feet of mockingly laughing gods. </span>
      <span id="f1031"> This was the great vomiting he had longed for: death, the smashing to bits of the form he hated! </span>
      <span id="f1032"> Let him be food for fishes, this dog Siddhartha, this lunatic, this depraved and rotten body, this weakened and abused soul! </span>
      <span id="f1033"> Let him be food for fishes and crocodiles, let him be chopped to bits by the daemons!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1034">With a distorted face, he stared into the water, saw the reflection of his face and spit at it. </span>
      <span id="f1035"> In deep tiredness, he took his arm away from the trunk of the tree and turned a bit, in order to let himself fall straight down, in order to finally drown. </span>
      <span id="f1036"> With his eyes closed, he slipped towards death.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1037">Then, out of remote areas of his soul, out of past times of his now weary life, a sound stirred up. </span>
      <span id="f1038"> It was a word, a syllable, which he, without thinking, with a slurred voice, spoke to himself, the old word which is the beginning and the end of all prayers of the Brahmans, the holy &#34;Om&#34;, which roughly means &#34;that what is perfect&#34; or &#34;the completion&#34;. </span>
      <span id="f1039"> And in the moment when the sound of &#34;Om&#34; touched Siddhartha&#39;s ear, his dormant spirit suddenly woke up and realized the foolishness of his actions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1040">Siddhartha was deeply shocked. </span>
      <span id="f1041"> So this was how things were with him, so doomed was he, so much he had lost his way and was forsaken by all knowledge, that he had been able to seek death, that this wish, this wish of a child, had been able to grow in him: to find rest by annihilating his body! </span>
      <span id="f1042"> What all agony of these recent times, all sobering realizations, all desperation had not brought about, this was brought on by this moment, when the Om entered his consciousness:  he became aware of himself in his misery and in his error.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1043">Om! </span>
      <span id="f1044">he spoke to himself:  Om! </span>
      <span id="f1045"> and again he knew about Brahman, knew about the indestructibility of life, knew about all that is divine, which he had forgotten.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1046">But this was only a moment, flash. </span>
      <span id="f1047"> By the foot of the coconut-tree, Siddhartha collapsed, struck down by tiredness, mumbling Om, placed his head on the root of the tree and fell into a deep sleep.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1048">Deep was his sleep and without dreams, for a long time he had not known such a sleep any more. </span>
      <span id="f1049"> When he woke up after many hours, he felt as if ten years had passed, he heard the water quietly flowing, did not know where he was and who had brought him here, opened his eyes, saw with astonishment that there were trees and the sky above him, and he remembered where he was and how he got here. </span>
      <span id="f1050"> But it took him a long while for this, and the past seemed to him as if it had been covered by a veil, infinitely distant, infinitely far away, infinitely meaningless. </span>
      <span id="f1051">He only knew that his previous life (in the first moment when he thought about it, this past life seemed to him like a very old, previous incarnation, like an early pre-birth of his present self)--that his previous life had been abandoned by him, that, full of disgust and wretchedness, he had even intended to throw his life away, but that by a river, under a coconut-tree, he has come to his senses, the holy word Om on his lips, that then he had fallen asleep and had now woken up and was looking at the world as a new man. </span>
      <span id="f1052"> Quietly, he spoke the word Om to himself, speaking which he had fallen asleep, and it seemed to him as if his entire long sleep had been nothing but a long meditative recitation of Om, a thinking of Om, a submergence and complete entering into Om, into the nameless, the perfected.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1053">What a wonderful sleep had this been! </span>
      <span id="f1054"> Never before by sleep, he had been thus refreshed, thus renewed, thus rejuvenated! </span>
      <span id="f1055"> Perhaps, he had really died, had drowned and was reborn in a new body? </span>
      <span id="f1056"> But no, he knew himself, he knew his hand and his feet, knew the place where he lay, knew this self in his chest, this Siddhartha, the eccentric, the weird one, but this Siddhartha was nevertheless transformed, was renewed, was strangely well rested, strangely awake, joyful and curious.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1057">Siddhartha straightened up, then he saw a person sitting opposite to him, an unknown man, a monk in a yellow robe with a shaven head, sitting in the position of pondering. </span>
      <span id="f1058"> He observed the man, who had neither hair on his head nor a beard, and he had not observed him for long when he recognised this monk as Govinda, the friend of his youth, Govinda who had taken his refuge with the exalted Buddha. </span>
      <span id="f1059"> Govinda had aged, he too, but still his face bore the same features, expressed zeal, faithfulness, searching, timidness. </span>
      <span id="f1060"> But when Govinda now, sensing his gaze, opened his eyes and looked at him, Siddhartha saw that Govinda did not recognise him. </span>
      <span id="f1061"> Govinda was happy to find him awake; apparently, he had been sitting here for a long time and been waiting for him to wake up, though he did not know him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1062">&#34;I have been sleeping,&#34; said Siddhartha. </span>
      <span id="f1063"> &#34;However did you get here?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1064">&#34;You have been sleeping,&#34; answered Govinda. </span>
      <span id="f1065"> &#34;It is not good to be sleeping in such places, where snakes often are and the animals of the forest have their paths. </span>
      <span id="f1066"> I, oh sir, am a follower of the exalted Gotama, the Buddha, the Sakyamuni, and have been on a pilgrimage together with several of us on this path, when I saw you lying and sleeping in a place where it is dangerous to sleep. </span>
      <span id="f1067"> Therefore, I sought to wake you up, oh sir, and since I saw that your sleep was very deep, I stayed behind from my group and sat with you. </span>
      <span id="f1068"> And then, so it seems, I have fallen asleep myself, I who wanted to guard your sleep. </span>
      <span id="f1069"> Badly, I have served you, tiredness has overwhelmed me. </span>
      <span id="f1070"> But now that you&#39;re awake, let me go to catch up with my brothers.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1071">&#34;I thank you, Samana, for watching out over my sleep,&#34; spoke Siddhartha. </span>
      <span id="f1072">&#34;You&#39;re friendly, you followers of the exalted one. </span>
      <span id="f1073"> Now you may go then.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1074">&#34;I&#39;m going, sir. </span>
      <span id="f1075"> May you, sir, always be in good health.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1076">&#34;I thank you, Samana.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1077">Govinda made the gesture of a salutation and said:  &#34;Farewell.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1078">&#34;Farewell, Govinda,&#34; said Siddhartha.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1079">The monk stopped.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1080">&#34;Permit me to ask, sir, from where do you know my name?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1081">Now, Siddhartha smiled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1082">&#34;I know you, oh Govinda, from your father&#39;s hut, and from the school of the Brahmans, and from the offerings, and from our walk to the Samanas, and from that hour when you took your refuge with the exalted one in the grove Jetavana.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1083">&#34;You&#39;re Siddhartha,&#34; Govinda exclaimed loudly. </span>
      <span id="f1084"> &#34;Now, I&#39;m recognising you, and don&#39;t comprehend any more how I couldn&#39;t recognise you right away. </span>
      <span id="f1085"> Be welcome, Siddhartha, my joy is great, to see you again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1086">&#34;It also gives me joy, to see you again. </span>
      <span id="f1087"> You&#39;ve been the guard of my sleep, again I thank you for this, though I wouldn&#39;t have required any guard. </span>
      <span id="f1088"> Where are you going to, oh friend?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1089">&#34;I&#39;m going nowhere. </span>
      <span id="f1090"> We monks are always travelling, whenever it is not the rainy season, we always move from one place to another, live according to the rules if the teachings passed on to us, accept alms, move on. </span>
      <span id="f1091"> It is always like this. </span>
      <span id="f1092"> But you, Siddhartha, where are you going to?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1093">Quoth Siddhartha:  &#34;With me too, friend, it is as it is with you. </span>
      <span id="f1094"> I&#39;m going nowhere. </span>
      <span id="f1095"> I&#39;m just travelling. </span>
      <span id="f1096"> I&#39;m on a pilgrimage.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1097">Govinda spoke:  &#34;You&#39;re saying: you&#39;re on a pilgrimage, and I believe in you. </span>
      <span id="f1098"> But, forgive me, oh Siddhartha, you do not look like a pilgrim. </span>
      <span id="f1099">You&#39;re wearing a rich man&#39;s garments, you&#39;re wearing the shoes of a distinguished gentleman, and your hair, with the fragrance of perfume, is not a pilgrim&#39;s hair, not the hair of a Samana.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1100">&#34;Right so, my dear, you have observed well, your keen eyes see everything. </span>
      <span id="f1101"> But I haven&#39;t said to you that I was a Samana. </span>
      <span id="f1102"> I said: I&#39;m on a pilgrimage. </span>
      <span id="f1103"> And so it is:  I&#39;m on a pilgrimage.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1104">&#34;You&#39;re on a pilgrimage,&#34; said Govinda. </span>
      <span id="f1105"> &#34;But few would go on a pilgrimage in such clothes, few in such shoes, few with such hair. </span>
      <span id="f1106">Never I have met such a pilgrim, being a pilgrim myself for many years.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1107">&#34;I believe you, my dear Govinda. </span>
      <span id="f1108"> But now, today, you&#39;ve met a pilgrim just like this, wearing such shoes, such a garment. </span>
      <span id="f1109"> Remember, my dear: Not eternal is the world of appearances, not eternal, anything but eternal are our garments and the style of our hair, and our hair and bodies themselves. </span>
      <span id="f1110"> I&#39;m wearing a rich man&#39;s clothes, you&#39;ve seen this quite right. </span>
      <span id="f1111"> I&#39;m wearing them, because I have been a rich man, and I&#39;m wearing my hair like the worldly and lustful people, for I have been one of them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1112">&#34;And now, Siddhartha, what are you now?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1113">&#34;I don&#39;t know it, I don&#39;t know it just like you. </span>
      <span id="f1114"> I&#39;m travelling. </span>
      <span id="f1115"> I was a rich man and am no rich man any more, and what I&#39;ll be tomorrow, I don&#39;t know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1116">&#34;You&#39;ve lost your riches?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1117">&#34;I&#39;ve lost them or they me. </span>
      <span id="f1118"> They somehow happened to slip away from me. </span>
      <span id="f1119">The wheel of physical manifestations is turning quickly, Govinda. </span>
      <span id="f1120"> Where is Siddhartha the Brahman? </span>
      <span id="f1121"> Where is Siddhartha the Samana? </span>
      <span id="f1122"> Where is Siddhartha the rich man? </span>
      <span id="f1123"> Non-eternal things change quickly, Govinda, you know it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1124">Govinda looked at the friend of his youth for a long time, with doubt in his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1125"> After that, he gave him the salutation which one would use on a gentleman and went on his way.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1126">With a smiling face, Siddhartha watched him leave, he loved him still, this faithful man, this fearful man. </span>
      <span id="f1127"> And how could he not have loved everybody and everything in this moment, in the glorious hour after his wonderful sleep, filled with Om! </span>
      <span id="f1128"> The enchantment, which had happened inside of him in his sleep and by means of the Om, was this very thing that he loved everything, that he was full of joyful love for everything he saw. </span>
      <span id="f1129"> And it was this very thing, so it seemed to him now, which had been his sickness before, that he was not able to love anybody or anything.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1130">With a smiling face, Siddhartha watched the leaving monk. </span>
      <span id="f1131"> The sleep had strengthened him much, but hunger gave him much pain, for by now he had not eaten for two days, and the times were long past when he had been tough against hunger. </span>
      <span id="f1132"> With sadness, and yet also with a smile, he thought of that time. </span>
      <span id="f1133"> In those days, so he remembered, he had boasted of three things to Kamala, had been able to do three noble and undefeatable feats: fasting--waiting--thinking. </span>
      <span id="f1134"> These had been his possession, his power and strength, his solid staff; in the busy, laborious years of his youth, he had learned these three feats, nothing else. </span>
      <span id="f1135"> And now, they had abandoned him, none of them was his any more, neither fasting, nor waiting, nor thinking. </span>
      <span id="f1136"> For the most wretched things, he had given them up, for what fades most quickly, for sensual lust, for the good life, for riches! </span>
      <span id="f1137"> His life had indeed been strange. </span>
      <span id="f1138">And now, so it seemed, now he had really become a childlike person.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1139">Siddhartha thought about his situation. </span>
      <span id="f1140"> Thinking was hard on him, he did not really feel like it, but he forced himself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1141">Now, he thought, since all these most easily perishing things have slipped from me again, now I&#39;m standing here under the sun again just as I have been standing here a little child, nothing is mine, I have no abilities, there is nothing I could bring about, I have learned nothing. </span>
      <span id="f1142">How wondrous is this! </span>
      <span id="f1143"> Now, that I&#39;m no longer young, that my hair is already half gray, that my strength is fading, now I&#39;m starting again at the beginning and as a child! </span>
      <span id="f1144"> Again, he had to smile. </span>
      <span id="f1145"> Yes, his fate had been strange! </span>
      <span id="f1146"> Things were going downhill with him, and now he was again facing the world void and naked and stupid. </span>
      <span id="f1147"> But he could not feed sad about this, no, he even felt a great urge to laugh, to laugh about himself, to laugh about this strange, foolish world.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1148">&#34;Things are going downhill with you!&#34; he said to himself, and laughed about it, and as he was saying it, he happened to glance at the river, and he also saw the river going downhill, always moving on downhill, and singing and being happy through it all. </span>
      <span id="f1149"> He liked this well, kindly he smiled at the river. </span>
      <span id="f1150"> Was this not the river in which he had intended to drown himself, in past times, a hundred years ago, or had he dreamed this?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1151">Wondrous indeed was my life, so he thought, wondrous detours it has taken. </span>
      <span id="f1152"> As a boy, I had only to do with gods and offerings. </span>
      <span id="f1153"> As a youth, I had only to do with asceticism, with thinking and meditation, was searching for Brahman, worshipped the eternal in the Atman. </span>
      <span id="f1154"> But as a young man, I followed the penitents, lived in the forest, suffered of heat and frost, learned to hunger, taught my body to become dead. </span>
      <span id="f1155">Wonderfully, soon afterwards, insight came towards me in the form of the great Buddha&#39;s teachings, I felt the knowledge of the oneness of the world circling in me like my own blood. </span>
      <span id="f1156"> But I also had to leave Buddha and the great knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f1157"> I went and learned the art of love with Kamala, learned trading with Kamaswami, piled up money, wasted money, learned to love my stomach, learned to please my senses. </span>
      <span id="f1158"> I had to spend many years losing my spirit, to unlearn thinking again, to forget the oneness. </span>
      <span id="f1159"> Isn&#39;t it just as if I had turned slowly and on a long detour from a man into a child, from a thinker into a childlike person? </span>
      <span id="f1160"> And yet, this path has been very good; and yet, the bird in my chest has not died. </span>
      <span id="f1161"> But what a path has this been! </span>
      <span id="f1162"> I had to pass through so much stupidity, through so much vices, through so many errors, through so much disgust and disappointments and woe, just to become a child again and to be able to start over. </span>
      <span id="f1163"> But it was right so, my heart says &#34;Yes&#34; to it, my eyes smile to it. </span>
      <span id="f1164"> I&#39;ve had to experience despair, I&#39;ve had to sink down to the most foolish one of all thoughts, to the thought of suicide, in order to be able to experience divine grace, to hear Om again, to be able to sleep properly and awake properly again. </span>
      <span id="f1165"> I had to become a fool, to find Atman in me again. </span>
      <span id="f1166"> I had to sin, to be able to live again. </span>
      <span id="f1167"> Where else might my path lead me to? </span>
      <span id="f1168"> It is foolish, this path, it moves in loops, perhaps it is going around in a circle. </span>
      <span id="f1169"> Let it go as it likes, I want to take it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1170">Wonderfully, he felt joy rolling like waves in his chest.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1171">Wherever from, he asked his heart, where from did you get this happiness? </span>
      <span id="f1172"> Might it come from that long, good sleep, which has done me so good? </span>
      <span id="f1173"> Or from the word Om, which I said? </span>
      <span id="f1174"> Or from the fact that I have escaped, that I have completely fled, that I am finally free again and am standing like a child under the sky? </span>
      <span id="f1175"> Oh how good is it to have fled, to have become free! </span>
      <span id="f1176"> How clean and beautiful is the air here, how good to breathe! </span>
      <span id="f1177"> There, where I ran away from, there everything smelled of ointments, of spices, of wine, of excess, of sloth. </span>
      <span id="f1178"> How did I hate this world of the rich, of those who revel in fine food, of the gamblers! </span>
      <span id="f1179"> How did I hate myself for staying in this terrible world for so long! </span>
      <span id="f1180"> How did I hate myself, have deprive, poisoned, tortured myself, have made myself old and evil! </span>
      <span id="f1181"> No, never again I will, as I used to like doing so much, delude myself into thinking that Siddhartha was wise! </span>
      <span id="f1182"> But this one thing I have done well, this I like, this I must praise, that there is now an end to that hatred against myself, to that foolish and dreary life! </span>
      <span id="f1183"> I praise you, Siddhartha, after so many years of foolishness, you have once again had an idea, have done something, have heard the bird in your chest singing and have followed it!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1184">Thus he praised himself, found joy in himself, listened curiously to his stomach, which was rumbling with hunger. </span>
      <span id="f1185"> He had now, so he felt, in these recent times and days, completely tasted and spit out, devoured up to the point of desperation and death, a piece of suffering, a piece of misery. </span>
      <span id="f1186"> Like this, it was good. </span>
      <span id="f1187"> For much longer, he could have stayed with Kamaswami, made money, wasted money, filled his stomach, and let his soul die of thirst; for much longer he could have lived in this soft, well upholstered hell, if this had not happened: the moment of complete hopelessness and despair, that most extreme moment, when he hung over the rushing waters and was ready to destroy himself. </span>
      <span id="f1188"> That he had felt this despair, this deep disgust, and that he had not succumbed to it, that the bird, the joyful source and voice in him was still alive after all, this was why he felt joy, this was why he laughed, this was why his face was smiling brightly under his hair which had turned gray.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1189">&#34;It is good,&#34; he thought, &#34;to get a taste of everything for oneself, which one needs to know. </span>
      <span id="f1190"> That lust for the world and riches do not belong to the good things, I have already learned as a child. </span>
      <span id="f1191"> I have known it for a long time, but I have experienced only now. </span>
      <span id="f1192"> And now I know it, don&#39;t just know it in my memory, but in my eyes, in my heart, in my stomach. </span>
      <span id="f1193"> Good for me, to know this!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1194">For a long time, he pondered his transformation, listened to the bird, as it sang for joy. </span>
      <span id="f1195"> Had not this bird died in him, had he not felt its death? </span>
      <span id="f1196"> No, something else from within him had died, something which already for a long time had yearned to die. </span>
      <span id="f1197"> Was it not this what he used to intend to kill in his ardent years as a penitent? </span>
      <span id="f1198"> Was this not his self, his small, frightened, and proud self, he had wrestled with for so many years, which had defeated him again and again, which was back again after every killing, prohibited joy, felt fear? </span>
      <span id="f1199"> Was it not this, which today had finally come to its death, here in the forest, by this lovely river? </span>
      <span id="f1200"> Was it not due to this death, that he was now like a child, so full of trust, so without fear, so full of joy?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1201">Now Siddhartha also got some idea of why he had fought this self in vain as a Brahman, as a penitent. </span>
      <span id="f1202"> Too much knowledge had held him back, too many holy verses, too many sacrificial rules, to much self-castigation, so much doing and striving for that goal! </span>
      <span id="f1203"> Full of arrogance, he had been, always the smartest, always working the most, always one step ahead of all others, always the knowing and spiritual one, always the priest or wise one. </span>
      <span id="f1204"> Into being a priest, into this arrogance, into this spirituality, his self had retreated, there it sat firmly and grew, while he thought he would kill it by fasting and penance. </span>
      <span id="f1205"> Now he saw it and saw that the secret voice had been right, that no teacher would ever have been able to bring about his salvation. </span>
      <span id="f1206">Therefore, he had to go out into the world, lose himself to lust and power, to woman and money, had to become a merchant, a dice-gambler, a drinker, and a greedy person, until the priest and Samana in him was dead. </span>
      <span id="f1207"> Therefore, he had to continue bearing these ugly years, bearing the disgust, the teachings, the pointlessness of a dreary and wasted life up to the end, up to bitter despair, until Siddhartha the lustful, Siddhartha the greedy could also die. </span>
      <span id="f1208"> He had died, a new Siddhartha had woken up from the sleep. </span>
      <span id="f1209"> He would also grow old, he would also eventually have to die, mortal was Siddhartha, mortal was every physical form. </span>
      <span id="f1210"> But today he was young, was a child, the new Siddhartha, and was full of joy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1211">He thought these thoughts, listened with a smile to his stomach, listened gratefully to a buzzing bee. </span>
      <span id="f1212"> Cheerfully, he looked into the rushing river, never before he had liked a water so well as this one, never before he had perceived the voice and the parable of the moving water thus strongly and beautifully. </span>
      <span id="f1213"> It seemed to him, as if the river had something special to tell him, something he did not know yet, which was still awaiting him. </span>
      <span id="f1214"> In this river, Siddhartha had intended to drown himself, in it the old, tired, desperate Siddhartha had drowned today. </span>
      <span id="f1215"> But the new Siddhartha felt a deep love for this rushing water, and decided for himself, not to leave it very soon.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>