<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>THE FERRYMAN</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1216">THE FERRYMAN</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1217">By this river I want to stay, thought Siddhartha, it is the same which I have crossed a long time ago on my way to the childlike people, a friendly ferryman had guided me then, he is the one I want to go to, starting out from his hut, my path had led me at that time into a new life, which had now grown old and is dead--my present path, my present new life, shall also take its start there!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1218">Tenderly, he looked into the rushing water, into the transparent green, into the crystal lines of its drawing, so rich in secrets. </span>
      <span id="f1219"> Bright pearls he saw rising from the deep, quiet bubbles of air floating on the reflecting surface, the blue of the sky being depicted in it. </span>
      <span id="f1220"> With a thousand eyes, the river looked at him, with green ones, with white ones, with crystal ones, with sky-blue ones. </span>
      <span id="f1221"> How did he love this water, how did it delight him, how grateful was he to it! </span>
      <span id="f1222"> In his heart he heard the voice talking, which was newly awaking, and it told him: Love this water! </span>
      <span id="f1223"> Stay near it! </span>
      <span id="f1224"> Learn from it! </span>
      <span id="f1225"> Oh yes, he wanted to learn from it, he wanted to listen to it. </span>
      <span id="f1226"> He who would understand this water and its secrets, so it seemed to him, would also understand many other things, many secrets, all secrets.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1227">But out of all secrets of the river, he today only saw one, this one touched his soul. </span>
      <span id="f1228"> He saw: this water ran and ran, incessantly it ran, and was nevertheless always there, was always at all times the same and yet new in every moment! </span>
      <span id="f1229"> Great be he who would grasp this, understand this! </span>
      <span id="f1230"> He understood and grasped it not, only felt some idea of it stirring, a distant memory, divine voices.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1231">Siddhartha rose, the workings of hunger in his body became unbearable. </span>
      <span id="f1232">In a daze he walked on, up the path by the bank, upriver, listened to the current, listened to the rumbling hunger in his body.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1233">When he reached the ferry, the boat was just ready, and the same ferryman who had once transported the young Samana across the river, stood in the boat, Siddhartha recognised him, he had also aged very much.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1234">&#34;Would you like to ferry me over?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1235">The ferryman, being astonished to see such an elegant man walking along and on foot, took him into his boat and pushed it off the bank.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1236">&#34;It&#39;s a beautiful life you have chosen for yourself,&#34; the passenger spoke. </span>
      <span id="f1237"> &#34;It must be beautiful to live by this water every day and to cruise on it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1238">With a smile, the man at the oar moved from side to side:  &#34;It is beautiful, sir, it is as you say. </span>
      <span id="f1239"> But isn&#39;t every life, isn&#39;t every work beautiful?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1240">&#34;This may be true. </span>
      <span id="f1241"> But I envy you for yours.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1242">&#34;Ah, you would soon stop enjoying it. </span>
      <span id="f1243"> This is nothing for people wearing fine clothes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1244">Siddhartha laughed. </span>
      <span id="f1245"> &#34;Once before, I have been looked upon today because of my clothes, I have been looked upon with distrust. </span>
      <span id="f1246"> Wouldn&#39;t you, ferryman, like to accept these clothes, which are a nuisance to me, from me? </span>
      <span id="f1247"> For you must know, I have no money to pay your fare.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1248">&#34;You&#39;re joking, sir,&#34; the ferryman laughed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1249">&#34;I&#39;m not joking, friend. </span>
      <span id="f1250"> Behold, once before you have ferried me across this water in your boat for the immaterial reward of a good deed. </span>
      <span id="f1251"> Thus, do it today as well, and accept my clothes for it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1252">&#34;And do you, sir, intent to continue travelling without clothes?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1253">&#34;Ah, most of all I wouldn&#39;t want to continue travelling at all. </span>
      <span id="f1254"> Most of all I would like you, ferryman, to give me an old loincloth and kept me with you as your assistant, or rather as your trainee, for I&#39;ll have to learn first how to handle the boat.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1255">For a long time, the ferryman looked at the stranger, searching.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1256">&#34;Now I recognise you,&#34; he finally said. </span>
      <span id="f1257"> &#34;At one time, you&#39;ve slept in my hut, this was a long time ago, possibly more than twenty years ago, and you&#39;ve been ferried across the river by me, and we parted like good friends. </span>
      <span id="f1258"> Haven&#39;t you&#39;ve been a Samana? </span>
      <span id="f1259"> I can&#39;t think of your name any more.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1260">&#34;My name is Siddhartha, and I was a Samana, when you&#39;ve last seen me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1261">&#34;So be welcome, Siddhartha. </span>
      <span id="f1262"> My name is Vasudeva. </span>
      <span id="f1263"> You will, so I hope, be my guest today as well and sleep in my hut, and tell me, where you&#39;re coming from and why these beautiful clothes are such a nuisance to you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1264">They had reached the middle of the river, and Vasudeva pushed the oar with more strength, in order to overcome the current. </span>
      <span id="f1265"> He worked calmly, his eyes fixed in on the front of the boat, with brawny arms. </span>
      <span id="f1266">Siddhartha sat and watched him, and remembered, how once before, on that last day of his time as a Samana, love for this man had stirred in his heart. </span>
      <span id="f1267"> Gratefully, he accepted Vasudeva&#39;s invitation. </span>
      <span id="f1268"> When they had reached the bank, he helped him to tie the boat to the stakes; after this, the ferryman asked him to enter the hut, offered him bread and water, and Siddhartha ate with eager pleasure, and also ate with eager pleasure of the mango fruits, Vasudeva offered him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1269">Afterwards, it was almost the time of the sunset, they sat on a log by the bank, and Siddhartha told the ferryman about where he originally came from and about his life, as he had seen it before his eyes today, in that hour of despair. </span>
      <span id="f1270"> Until late at night, lasted his tale.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1271">Vasudeva listened with great attention. </span>
      <span id="f1272"> Listening carefully, he let everything enter his mind, birthplace and childhood, all that learning, all that searching, all joy, all distress. </span>
      <span id="f1273"> This was among the ferryman&#39;s virtues one of the greatest:  like only a few, he knew how to listen. </span>
      <span id="f1274"> Without him having spoken a word, the speaker sensed how Vasudeva let his words enter his mind, quiet, open, waiting, how he did not lose a single one, awaited not a single one with impatience, did not add his praise or rebuke, was just listening. </span>
      <span id="f1275"> Siddhartha felt, what a happy fortune it is, to confess to such a listener, to bury in his heart his own life, his own search, his own suffering.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1276">But in the end of Siddhartha&#39;s tale, when he spoke of the tree by the river, and of his deep fall, of the holy Om, and how he had felt such a love for the river after his slumber, the ferryman listened with twice the attention, entirely and completely absorbed by it, with his eyes closed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1277">But when Siddhartha fell silent, and a long silence had occurred, then Vasudeva said:  &#34;It is as I thought. </span>
      <span id="f1278"> The river has spoken to you. </span>
      <span id="f1279"> It is your friend as well, it speaks to you as well. </span>
      <span id="f1280"> That is good, that is very good. </span>
      <span id="f1281"> Stay with me, Siddhartha, my friend. </span>
      <span id="f1282"> I used to have a wife, her bed was next to mine, but she has died a long time ago, for a long time, I have lived alone. </span>
      <span id="f1283"> Now, you shall live with me, there is space and food for both.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1284">&#34;I thank you,&#34; said Siddhartha, &#34;I thank you and accept. </span>
      <span id="f1285"> And I also thank you for this, Vasudeva, for listening to me so well! </span>
      <span id="f1286"> These people are rare who know how to listen. </span>
      <span id="f1287"> And I did not meet a single one who knew it as well as you did. </span>
      <span id="f1288"> I will also learn in this respect from you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1289">&#34;You will learn it,&#34; spoke Vasudeva, &#34;but not from me. </span>
      <span id="f1290"> The river has taught me to listen, from it you will learn it as well. </span>
      <span id="f1291"> It knows everything, the river, everything can be learned from it. </span>
      <span id="f1292"> See, you&#39;ve already learned this from the water too, that it is good to strive downwards, to sink, to seek depth. </span>
      <span id="f1293"> The rich and elegant Siddhartha is becoming an oarsman&#39;s servant, the learned Brahman Siddhartha becomes a ferryman: this has also been told to you by the river. </span>
      <span id="f1294"> You&#39;ll learn that other thing from it as well.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1295">Quoth Siddhartha after a long pause:  &#34;What other thing, Vasudeva?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1296">Vasudeva rose. </span>
      <span id="f1297"> &#34;It is late,&#34; he said, &#34;let&#39;s go to sleep. </span>
      <span id="f1298"> I can&#39;t tell you that other thing, oh friend. </span>
      <span id="f1299"> You&#39;ll learn it, or perhaps you know it already. </span>
      <span id="f1300"> See, I&#39;m no learned man, I have no special skill in speaking, I also have no special skill in thinking. </span>
      <span id="f1301"> All I&#39;m able to do is to listen and to be godly, I have learned nothing else. </span>
      <span id="f1302"> If I was able to say and teach it, I might be a wise man, but like this I am only a ferryman, and it is my task to ferry people across the river. </span>
      <span id="f1303"> I have transported many, thousands; and to all of them, my river has been nothing but an obstacle on their travels. </span>
      <span id="f1304"> They travelled to seek money and business, and for weddings, and on pilgrimages, and the river was obstructing their path, and the ferryman&#39;s job was to get them quickly across that obstacle. </span>
      <span id="f1305"> But for some among thousands, a few, four or five, the river has stopped being an obstacle, they have heard its voice, they have listened to it, and the river has become sacred to them, as it has become sacred to me. </span>
      <span id="f1306"> Let&#39;s rest now, Siddhartha.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1307">Siddhartha stayed with the ferryman and learned to operate the boat, and when there was nothing to do at the ferry, he worked with Vasudeva in the rice-field, gathered wood, plucked the fruit off the banana-trees. </span>
      <span id="f1308">He learned to build an oar, and learned to mend the boat, and to weave baskets, and was joyful because of everything he learned, and the days and months passed quickly. </span>
      <span id="f1309"> But more than Vasudeva could teach him, he was taught by the river. </span>
      <span id="f1310"> Incessantly, he learned from it. </span>
      <span id="f1311"> Most of all, he learned from it to listen, to pay close attention with a quiet heart, with a waiting, opened soul, without passion, without a wish, without judgement, without an opinion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1312">In a friendly manner, he lived side by side with Vasudeva, and occasionally they exchanged some words, few and at length thought about words. </span>
      <span id="f1313"> Vasudeva was no friend of words; rarely, Siddhartha succeeded in persuading him to speak.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1314">&#34;Did you,&#34; so he asked him at one time, &#34;did you too learn that secret from the river: that there is no time?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1315">Vasudeva&#39;s face was filled with a bright smile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1316">&#34;Yes, Siddhartha,&#34; he spoke. </span>
      <span id="f1317"> &#34;It is this what you mean, isn&#39;t it: that the river is everywhere at once, at the source and at the mouth, at the waterfall, at the ferry, at the rapids, in the sea, in the mountains, everywhere at once, and that there is only the present time for it, not the shadow of the past, not the shadow of the future?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1318">&#34;This it is,&#34; said Siddhartha. </span>
      <span id="f1319"> &#34;And when I had learned it, I looked at my life, and it was also a river, and the boy Siddhartha was only separated from the man Siddhartha and from the old man Siddhartha by a shadow, not by something real. </span>
      <span id="f1320"> Also, Siddhartha&#39;s previous births were no past, and his death and his return to Brahma was no future. </span>
      <span id="f1321"> Nothing was, nothing will be; everything is, everything has existence and is present.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1322">Siddhartha spoke with ecstasy; deeply, this enlightenment had delighted him. </span>
      <span id="f1323"> Oh, was not all suffering time, were not all forms of tormenting oneself and being afraid time, was not everything hard, everything hostile in the world gone and overcome as soon as one had overcome time, as soon as time would have been put out of existence by one&#39;s thoughts? </span>
      <span id="f1324">In ecstatic delight, he had spoken, but Vasudeva smiled at him brightly and nodded in confirmation; silently he nodded, brushed his hand over Siddhartha&#39;s shoulder, turned back to his work.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1325">And once again, when the river had just increased its flow in the rainy season and made a powerful noise, then said Siddhartha:  &#34;Isn&#39;t it so, oh friend, the river has many voices, very many voices? </span>
      <span id="f1326"> Hasn&#39;t it the voice of a king, and of a warrior, and of a bull, and of a bird of the night, and of a woman giving birth, and of a sighing man, and a thousand other voices more?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1327">&#34;So it is,&#34; Vasudeva nodded, &#34;all voices of the creatures are in its voice.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1328">&#34;And do you know,&#34; Siddhartha continued, &#34;what word it speaks, when you succeed in hearing all of its ten thousand voices at once?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1329">Happily, Vasudeva&#39;s face was smiling, he bent over to Siddhartha and spoke the holy Om into his ear. </span>
      <span id="f1330"> And this had been the very thing which Siddhartha had also been hearing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1331">And time after time, his smile became more similar to the ferryman&#39;s, became almost just as bright, almost just as throughly glowing with bliss, just as shining out of thousand small wrinkles, just as alike to a child&#39;s, just as alike to an old man&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f1332"> Many travellers, seeing the two ferrymen, thought they were brothers. </span>
      <span id="f1333"> Often, they sat in the evening together by the bank on the log, said nothing and both listened to the water, which was no water to them, but the voice of life, the voice of what exists, of what is eternally taking shape. </span>
      <span id="f1334"> And it happened from time to time that both, when listening to the river, thought of the same things, of a conversation from the day before yesterday, of one of their travellers, the face and fate of whom had occupied their thoughts, of death, of their childhood, and that they both in the same moment, when the river had been saying something good to them, looked at each other, both thinking precisely the same thing, both delighted about the same answer to the same question.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1335">There was something about this ferry and the two ferrymen which was transmitted to others, which many of the travellers felt. </span>
      <span id="f1336"> It happened occasionally that a traveller, after having looked at the face of one of the ferrymen, started to tell the story of his life, told about pains, confessed evil things, asked for comfort and advice. </span>
      <span id="f1337"> It happened occasionally that someone asked for permission to stay for a night with them to listen to the river. </span>
      <span id="f1338"> It also happened that curious people came, who had been told that there were two wise men, or sorcerers, or holy men living by that ferry. </span>
      <span id="f1339"> The curious people asked many questions, but they got no answers, and they found neither sorcerers nor wise men, they only found two friendly little old men, who seemed to be mute and to have become a bit strange and gaga. </span>
      <span id="f1340"> And the curious people laughed and were discussing how foolishly and gullibly the common people were spreading such empty rumours.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1341">The years passed by, and nobody counted them. </span>
      <span id="f1342"> Then, at one time, monks came by on a pilgrimage, followers of Gotama, the Buddha, who were asking to be ferried across the river, and by them the ferrymen were told that they were most hurriedly walking back to their great teacher, for the news had spread the exalted one was deadly sick and would soon die his last human death, in order to become one with the salvation. </span>
      <span id="f1343"> It was not long, until a new flock of monks came along on their pilgrimage, and another one, and the monks as well as most of the other travellers and people walking through the land spoke of nothing else than of Gotama and his impending death. </span>
      <span id="f1344"> And as people are flocking from everywhere and from all sides, when they are going to war or to the coronation of a king, and are gathering like ants in droves, thus they flocked, like being drawn on by a magic spell, to where the great Buddha was awaiting his death, where the huge event was to take place and the great perfected one of an era was to become one with the glory.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1345">Often, Siddhartha thought in those days of the dying wise man, the great teacher, whose voice had admonished nations and had awoken hundreds of thousands, whose voice he had also once heard, whose holy face he had also once seen with respect. </span>
      <span id="f1346"> Kindly, he thought of him, saw his path to perfection before his eyes, and remembered with a smile those words which he had once, as a young man, said to him, the exalted one. </span>
      <span id="f1347"> They had been, so it seemed to him, proud and precocious words; with a smile, he remembered them. </span>
      <span id="f1348"> For a long time he knew that there was nothing standing between Gotama and him any more, though he was still unable to accept his teachings. </span>
      <span id="f1349"> No, there was no teaching a truly searching person, someone who truly wanted to find, could accept. </span>
      <span id="f1350">But he who had found, he could approve of any teachings, every path, every goal, there was nothing standing between him and all the other thousand any more who lived in that what is eternal, who breathed what is divine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1351">On one of these days, when so many went on a pilgrimage to the dying Buddha, Kamala also went to him, who used to be the most beautiful of the courtesans. </span>
      <span id="f1352"> A long time ago, she had retired from her previous life, had given her garden to the monks of Gotama as a gift, had taken her refuge in the teachings, was among the friends and benefactors of the pilgrims. </span>
      <span id="f1353"> Together with Siddhartha the boy, her son, she had gone on her way due to the news of the near death of Gotama, in simple clothes, on foot. </span>
      <span id="f1354"> With her little son, she was travelling by the river; but the boy had soon grown tired, desired to go back home, desired to rest, desired to eat, became disobedient and started whining.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1355">Kamala often had to take a rest with him, he was accustomed to having his way against her, she had to feed him, had to comfort him, had to scold him. </span>
      <span id="f1356"> He did not comprehend why he had to go on this exhausting and sad pilgrimage with his mother, to an unknown place, to a stranger, who was holy and about to die. </span>
      <span id="f1357"> So what if he died, how did this concern the boy?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1358">The pilgrims were getting close to Vasudeva&#39;s ferry, when little Siddhartha once again forced his mother to rest. </span>
      <span id="f1359"> She, Kamala herself, had also become tired, and while the boy was chewing a banana, she crouched down on the ground, closed her eyes a bit, and rested. </span>
      <span id="f1360"> But suddenly, she uttered a wailing scream, the boy looked at her in fear and saw her face having grown pale from horror; and from under her dress, a small, black snake fled, by which Kamala had been bitten.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1361">Hurriedly, they now both ran along the path, in order to reach people, and got near to the ferry, there Kamala collapsed, and was not able to go any further. </span>
      <span id="f1362"> But the boy started crying miserably, only interrupting it to kiss and hug his mother, and she also joined his loud screams for help, until the sound reached Vasudeva&#39;s ears, who stood at the ferry. </span>
      <span id="f1363">Quickly, he came walking, took the woman on his arms, carried her into the boat, the boy ran along, and soon they all reached the hut, were Siddhartha stood by the stove and was just lighting the fire. </span>
      <span id="f1364"> He looked up and first saw the boy&#39;s face, which wondrously reminded him of something, like a warning to remember something he had forgotten. </span>
      <span id="f1365"> Then he saw Kamala, whom he instantly recognised, though she lay unconscious in the ferryman&#39;s arms, and now he knew that it was his own son, whose face had been such a warning reminder to him, and the heart stirred in his chest.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1366">Kamala&#39;s wound was washed, but had already turned black and her body was swollen, she was made to drink a healing potion. </span>
      <span id="f1367"> Her consciousness returned, she lay on Siddhartha&#39;s bed in the hut and bent over her stood Siddhartha, who used to love her so much. </span>
      <span id="f1368"> It seemed like a dream to her; with a smile, she looked at her friend&#39;s face; just slowly she, realized her situation, remembered the bite, called timidly for the boy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1369">&#34;He&#39;s with you, don&#39;t worry,&#34; said Siddhartha.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1370">Kamala looked into his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1371"> She spoke with a heavy tongue, paralysed by the poison. </span>
      <span id="f1372"> &#34;You&#39;ve become old, my dear,&#34; she said, &#34;you&#39;ve become gray. </span>
      <span id="f1373"> But you are like the young Samana, who at one time came without clothes, with dusty feet, to me into the garden. </span>
      <span id="f1374"> You are much more like him, than you were like him at that time when you had left me and Kamaswami. </span>
      <span id="f1375"> In the eyes, you&#39;re like him, Siddhartha. </span>
      <span id="f1376"> Alas, I have also grown old, old--could you still recognise me?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1377">Siddhartha smiled:  &#34;Instantly, I recognised you, Kamala, my dear.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1378">Kamala pointed to her boy and said:  &#34;Did you recognise him as well? </span>
      <span id="f1379">He is your son.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1380">Her eyes became confused and fell shut. </span>
      <span id="f1381"> The boy wept, Siddhartha took him on his knees, let him weep, petted his hair, and at the sight of the child&#39;s face, a Brahman prayer came to his mind, which he had learned a long time ago, when he had been a little boy himself. </span>
      <span id="f1382"> Slowly, with a singing voice, he started to speak; from his past and childhood, the words came flowing to him. </span>
      <span id="f1383"> And with that singsong, the boy became calm, was only now and then uttering a sob and fell asleep. </span>
      <span id="f1384"> Siddhartha placed him on Vasudeva&#39;s bed. </span>
      <span id="f1385"> Vasudeva stood by the stove and cooked rice. </span>
      <span id="f1386"> Siddhartha gave him a look, which he returned with a smile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1387">&#34;She&#39;ll die,&#34; Siddhartha said quietly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1388">Vasudeva nodded; over his friendly face ran the light of the stove&#39;s fire.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1389">Once again, Kamala returned to consciousness. </span>
      <span id="f1390"> Pain distorted her face, Siddhartha&#39;s eyes read the suffering on her mouth, on her pale cheeks. </span>
      <span id="f1391">Quietly, he read it, attentively, waiting, his mind becoming one with her suffering. </span>
      <span id="f1392"> Kamala felt it, her gaze sought his eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1393">Looking at him, she said:  &#34;Now I see that your eyes have changed as well. </span>
      <span id="f1394"> They&#39;ve become completely different. </span>
      <span id="f1395"> By what do I still recognise that you&#39;re Siddhartha? </span>
      <span id="f1396"> It&#39;s you, and it&#39;s not you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1397">Siddhartha said nothing, quietly his eyes looked at hers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1398">&#34;You have achieved it?&#34; she asked. </span>
      <span id="f1399"> &#34;You have found peace?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1400">He smiled and placed his hand on hers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1401">&#34;I&#39;m seeing it,&#34; she said, &#34;I&#39;m seeing it. </span>
      <span id="f1402"> I too will find peace.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1403">&#34;You have found it,&#34; Siddhartha spoke in a whisper.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1404">Kamala never stopped looking into his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1405"> She thought about her pilgrimage to Gotama, which she wanted to take, in order to see the face of the perfected one, to breathe his peace, and she thought that she had now found him in his place, and that it was good, just as good, as if she had seen the other one. </span>
      <span id="f1406"> She wanted to tell this to him, but the tongue no longer obeyed her will. </span>
      <span id="f1407"> Without speaking, she looked at him, and he saw the life fading from her eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1408"> When the final pain filled her eyes and made them grow dim, when the final shiver ran through her limbs, his finger closed her eyelids.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1409">For a long time, he sat and looked at her peacefully dead face. </span>
      <span id="f1410"> For a long time, he observed her mouth, her old, tired mouth, with those lips, which had become thin, and he remembered, that he used to, in the spring of his years, compare this mouth with a freshly cracked fig. </span>
      <span id="f1411"> For a long time, he sat, read in the pale face, in the tired wrinkles, filled himself with this sight, saw his own face lying in the same manner, just as white, just as quenched out, and saw at the same time his face and hers being young, with red lips, with fiery eyes, and the feeling of this both being present and at the same time real, the feeling of eternity, completely filled every aspect of his being. </span>
      <span id="f1412"> Deeply he felt, more deeply than ever before, in this hour, the indestructibility of every life, the eternity of every moment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1413">When he rose, Vasudeva had prepared rice for him. </span>
      <span id="f1414"> But Siddhartha did not eat. </span>
      <span id="f1415"> In the stable, where their goat stood, the two old men prepared beds of straw for themselves, and Vasudeva lay himself down to sleep. </span>
      <span id="f1416"> But Siddhartha went outside and sat this night before the hut, listening to the river, surrounded by the past, touched and encircled by all times of his life at the same time. </span>
      <span id="f1417"> But occasionally, he rose, stepped to the door of the hut and listened, whether the boy was sleeping.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1418">Early in the morning, even before the sun could be seen, Vasudeva came out of the stable and walked over to his friend.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1419">&#34;You haven&#39;t slept,&#34; he said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1420">&#34;No, Vasudeva. </span>
      <span id="f1421"> I sat here, I was listening to the river. </span>
      <span id="f1422"> A lot it has told me, deeply it has filled me with the healing thought, with the thought of oneness.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1423">&#34;You&#39;ve experienced suffering, Siddhartha, but I see: no sadness has entered your heart.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1424">&#34;No, my dear, how should I be sad? </span>
      <span id="f1425"> I, who have been rich and happy, have become even richer and happier now. </span>
      <span id="f1426"> My son has been given to me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1427">&#34;Your son shall be welcome to me as well. </span>
      <span id="f1428"> But now, Siddhartha, let&#39;s get to work, there is much to be done. </span>
      <span id="f1429"> Kamala has died on the same bed, on which my wife had died a long time ago. </span>
      <span id="f1430"> Let us also build Kamala&#39;s funeral pile on the same hill on which I had then built my wife&#39;s funeral pile.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1431">While the boy was still asleep, they built the funeral pile.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>