<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>THE SON</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1432">THE SON</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1433">Timid and weeping, the boy had attended his mother&#39;s funeral; gloomy and shy, he had listened to Siddhartha, who greeted him as his son and welcomed him at his place in Vasudeva&#39;s hut. </span>
      <span id="f1434"> Pale, he sat for many days by the hill of the dead, did not want to eat, gave no open look, did not open his heart, met his fate with resistance and denial.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1435">Siddhartha spared him and let him do as he pleased, he honoured his mourning. </span>
      <span id="f1436"> Siddhartha understood that his son did not know him, that he could not love him like a father. </span>
      <span id="f1437"> Slowly, he also saw and understood that the eleven-year-old was a pampered boy, a mother&#39;s boy, and that he had grown up in the habits of rich people, accustomed to finer food, to a soft bed, accustomed to giving orders to servants. </span>
      <span id="f1438"> Siddhartha understood that the mourning, pampered child could not suddenly and willingly be content with a life among strangers and in poverty. </span>
      <span id="f1439"> He did not force him, he did many a chore for him, always picked the best piece of the meal for him. </span>
      <span id="f1440"> Slowly, he hoped to win him over, by friendly patience.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1441">Rich and happy, he had called himself, when the boy had come to him. </span>
      <span id="f1442">Since time had passed on in the meantime, and the boy remained a stranger and in a gloomy disposition, since he displayed a proud and stubbornly disobedient heart, did not want to do any work, did not pay his respect to the old men, stole from Vasudeva&#39;s fruit-trees, then Siddhartha began to understand that his son had not brought him happiness and peace, but suffering and worry. </span>
      <span id="f1443"> But he loved him, and he preferred the suffering and worries of love over happiness and joy without the boy. </span>
      <span id="f1444"> Since young Siddhartha was in the hut, the old men had split the work. </span>
      <span id="f1445"> Vasudeva had again taken on the job of the ferryman all by himself, and Siddhartha, in order to be with his son, did the work in the hut and the field.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1446">For a long time, for long months, Siddhartha waited for his son to understand him, to accept his love, to perhaps reciprocate it. </span>
      <span id="f1447"> For long months, Vasudeva waited, watching, waited and said nothing. </span>
      <span id="f1448"> One day, when Siddhartha the younger had once again tormented his father very much with spite and an unsteadiness in his wishes and had broken both of his rice-bowls, Vasudeva took in the evening his friend aside and talked to him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1449">&#34;Pardon me.&#34; he said, &#34;from a friendly heart, I&#39;m talking to you. </span>
      <span id="f1450"> I&#39;m seeing that you are tormenting yourself, I&#39;m seeing that you&#39;re in grief. </span>
      <span id="f1451">Your son, my dear, is worrying you, and he is also worrying me. </span>
      <span id="f1452"> That young bird is accustomed to a different life, to a different nest. </span>
      <span id="f1453"> He has not, like you, ran away from riches and the city, being disgusted and fed up with it; against his will, he had to leave all this behind. </span>
      <span id="f1454">I asked the river, oh friend, many times I have asked it. </span>
      <span id="f1455"> But the river laughs, it laughs at me, it laughs at you and me, and is shaking with laughter at our foolishness. </span>
      <span id="f1456"> Water wants to join water, youth wants to join youth, your son is not in the place where he can prosper. </span>
      <span id="f1457"> You too should ask the river; you too should listen to it!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1458">Troubled, Siddhartha looked into his friendly face, in the many wrinkles of which there was incessant cheerfulness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1459">&#34;How could I part with him?&#34; he said quietly, ashamed. </span>
      <span id="f1460"> &#34;Give me some more time, my dear! </span>
      <span id="f1461"> See, I&#39;m fighting for him, I&#39;m seeking to win his heart, with love and with friendly patience I intent to capture it. </span>
      <span id="f1462">One day, the river shall also talk to him, he also is called upon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1463">Vasudeva&#39;s smile flourished more warmly. </span>
      <span id="f1464"> &#34;Oh yes, he too is called upon, he too is of the eternal life. </span>
      <span id="f1465"> But do we, you and me, know what he is called upon to do, what path to take, what actions to perform, what pain to endure? </span>
      <span id="f1466"> Not a small one, his pain will be; after all, his heart is proud and hard, people like this have to suffer a lot, err a lot, do much injustice, burden themselves with much sin. </span>
      <span id="f1467"> Tell me, my dear: you&#39;re not taking control of your son&#39;s upbringing? </span>
      <span id="f1468"> You don&#39;t force him? </span>
      <span id="f1469"> You don&#39;t beat him? </span>
      <span id="f1470"> You don&#39;t punish him?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1471">&#34;No, Vasudeva, I don&#39;t do anything of this.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1472">&#34;I knew it. </span>
      <span id="f1473"> You don&#39;t force him, don&#39;t beat him, don&#39;t give him orders, because you know that &#39;soft&#39; is stronger than &#39;hard&#39;, water stronger than rocks, love stronger than force. </span>
      <span id="f1474"> Very good, I praise you. </span>
      <span id="f1475"> But aren&#39;t you mistaken in thinking that you wouldn&#39;t force him, wouldn&#39;t punish him? </span>
      <span id="f1476"> Don&#39;t you shackle him with your love? </span>
      <span id="f1477"> Don&#39;t you make him feel inferior every day, and don&#39;t you make it even harder on him with your kindness and patience? </span>
      <span id="f1478"> Don&#39;t you force him, the arrogant and pampered boy, to live in a hut with two old banana-eaters, to whom even rice is a delicacy, whose thoughts can&#39;t be his, whose hearts are old and quiet and beats in a different pace than his? </span>
      <span id="f1479"> Isn&#39;t forced, isn&#39;t he punished by all this?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1480">Troubled, Siddhartha looked to the ground. </span>
      <span id="f1481"> Quietly, he asked:  &#34;What do you think should I do?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1482">Quoth Vasudeva:  &#34;Bring him into the city, bring him into his mother&#39;s house, there&#39;ll still be servants around, give him to them. </span>
      <span id="f1483"> And when there aren&#39;t any around any more, bring him to a teacher, not for the teachings&#39; sake, but so that he shall be among other boys, and among girls, and in the world which is his own. </span>
      <span id="f1484"> Have you never thought of this?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1485">&#34;You&#39;re seeing into my heart,&#34; Siddhartha spoke sadly. </span>
      <span id="f1486"> &#34;Often, I have thought of this. </span>
      <span id="f1487"> But look, how shall I put him, who had no tender heart anyhow, into this world? </span>
      <span id="f1488"> Won&#39;t he become exuberant, won&#39;t he lose himself to pleasure and power, won&#39;t he repeat all of his father&#39;s mistakes, won&#39;t he perhaps get entirely lost in Sansara?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1489">Brightly, the ferryman&#39;s smile lit up; softly, he touched Siddhartha&#39;s arm and said:  &#34;Ask the river about it, my friend! </span>
      <span id="f1490"> Hear it laugh about it! </span>
      <span id="f1491"> Would you actually believe that you had committed your foolish acts in order to spare your son from committing them too? </span>
      <span id="f1492"> And could you in any way protect your son from Sansara? </span>
      <span id="f1493"> How could you? </span>
      <span id="f1494"> By means of teachings, prayer, admonition? </span>
      <span id="f1495"> My dear, have you entirely forgotten that story, that story containing so many lessons, that story about Siddhartha, a Brahman&#39;s son, which you once told me here on this very spot? </span>
      <span id="f1496"> Who has kept the Samana Siddhartha safe from Sansara, from sin, from greed, from foolishness? </span>
      <span id="f1497"> Were his father&#39;s religious devotion, his teachers warnings, his own knowledge, his own search able to keep him safe? </span>
      <span id="f1498"> Which father, which teacher had been able to protect him from living his life for himself, from soiling himself with life, from burdening himself with guilt, from drinking the bitter drink for himself, from finding his path for himself? </span>
      <span id="f1499"> Would you think, my dear, anybody might perhaps be spared from taking this path? </span>
      <span id="f1500"> That perhaps your little son would be spared, because you love him, because you would like to keep him from suffering and pain and disappointment? </span>
      <span id="f1501"> But even if you would die ten times for him, you would not be able to take the slightest part of his destiny upon yourself.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1502">Never before, Vasudeva had spoken so many words. </span>
      <span id="f1503"> Kindly, Siddhartha thanked him, went troubled into the hut, could not sleep for a long time. </span>
      <span id="f1504"> Vasudeva had told him nothing, he had not already thought and known for himself. </span>
      <span id="f1505"> But this was a knowledge he could not act upon, stronger than the knowledge was his love for the boy, stronger was his tenderness, his fear to lose him. </span>
      <span id="f1506"> Had he ever lost his heart so much to something, had he ever loved any person thus, thus blindly, thus sufferingly, thus unsuccessfully, and yet thus happily?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1507">Siddhartha could not heed his friend&#39;s advice, he could not give up the boy. </span>
      <span id="f1508"> He let the boy give him orders, he let him disregard him. </span>
      <span id="f1509"> He said nothing and waited; daily, he began the mute struggle of friendliness, the silent war of patience. </span>
      <span id="f1510"> Vasudeva also said nothing and waited, friendly, knowing, patient. </span>
      <span id="f1511"> They were both masters of patience.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1512">At one time, when the boy&#39;s face reminded him very much of Kamala, Siddhartha suddenly had to think of a line which Kamala a long time ago, in the days of their youth, had once said to him. </span>
      <span id="f1513"> &#34;You cannot love,&#34; she had said to him, and he had agreed with her and had compared himself with a star, while comparing the childlike people with falling leaves, and nevertheless he had also sensed an accusation in that line. </span>
      <span id="f1514">Indeed, he had never been able to lose or devote himself completely to another person, to forget himself, to commit foolish acts for the love of another person; never he had been able to do this, and this was, as it had seemed to him at that time, the great distinction which set him apart from the childlike people. </span>
      <span id="f1515"> But now, since his son was here, now he, Siddhartha, had also become completely a childlike person, suffering for the sake of another person, loving another person, lost to a love, having become a fool on account of love. </span>
      <span id="f1516"> Now he too felt, late, once in his lifetime, this strongest and strangest of all passions, suffered from it, suffered miserably, and was nevertheless in bliss, was nevertheless renewed in one respect, enriched by one thing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1517">He did sense very well that this love, this blind love for his son, was a passion, something very human, that it was Sansara, a murky source, dark waters. </span>
      <span id="f1518"> Nevertheless, he felt at the same time, it was not worthless, it was necessary, came from the essence of his own being. </span>
      <span id="f1519">This pleasure also had to be atoned for, this pain also had to be endured, these foolish acts also had to be committed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1520">Through all this, the son let him commit his foolish acts, let him court for his affection, let him humiliate himself every day by giving in to his moods. </span>
      <span id="f1521"> This father had nothing which would have delighted him and nothing which he would have feared. </span>
      <span id="f1522"> He was a good man, this father, a good, kind, soft man, perhaps a very devout man, perhaps a saint, all these were no attributes which could win the boy over. </span>
      <span id="f1523"> He was bored by this father, who kept him prisoner here in this miserable hut of his, he was bored by him, and for him to answer every naughtiness with a smile, every insult with friendliness, every viciousness with kindness, this very thing was the hated trick of this old sneak. </span>
      <span id="f1524"> Much more the boy would have liked it if he had been threatened by him, if he had been abused by him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1525">A day came, when what young Siddhartha had on his mind came bursting forth, and he openly turned against his father. </span>
      <span id="f1526"> The latter had given him a task, he had told him to gather brushwood. </span>
      <span id="f1527"> But the boy did not leave the hut, in stubborn disobedience and rage he stayed where he was, thumped on the ground with his feet, clenched his fists, and screamed in a powerful outburst his hatred and contempt into his father&#39;s face.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1528">&#34;Get the brushwood for yourself!&#34; he shouted foaming at the mouth, &#34;I&#39;m not your servant. </span>
      <span id="f1529"> I do know, that you won&#39;t hit me, you don&#39;t dare; I do know, that you constantly want to punish me and put me down with your religious devotion and your indulgence. </span>
      <span id="f1530"> You want me to become like you, just as devout, just as soft, just as wise! </span>
      <span id="f1531"> But I, listen up, just to make you suffer, I rather want to become a highway-robber and murderer, and go to hell, than to become like you! </span>
      <span id="f1532"> I hate you, you&#39;re not my father, and if you&#39;ve ten times been my mother&#39;s fornicator!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1533">Rage and grief boiled over in him, foamed at the father in a hundred savage and evil words. </span>
      <span id="f1534"> Then the boy ran away and only returned late at night.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1535">But the next morning, he had disappeared. </span>
      <span id="f1536"> What had also disappeared was a small basket, woven out of bast of two colours, in which the ferrymen kept those copper and silver coins which they received as a fare. </span>
      <span id="f1537">The boat had also disappeared, Siddhartha saw it lying by the opposite bank. </span>
      <span id="f1538"> The boy had ran away.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1539">&#34;I must follow him,&#34; said Siddhartha, who had been shivering with grief since those ranting speeches, the boy had made yesterday. </span>
      <span id="f1540"> &#34;A child can&#39;t go through the forest all alone. </span>
      <span id="f1541"> He&#39;ll perish. </span>
      <span id="f1542"> We must build a raft, Vasudeva, to get over the water.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1543">&#34;We will build a raft,&#34; said Vasudeva, &#34;to get our boat back, which the boy has taken away. </span>
      <span id="f1544"> But him, you shall let run along, my friend, he is no child any more, he knows how to get around. </span>
      <span id="f1545"> He&#39;s looking for the path to the city, and he is right, don&#39;t forget that. </span>
      <span id="f1546"> He&#39;s doing what you&#39;ve failed to do yourself. </span>
      <span id="f1547"> He&#39;s taking care of himself, he&#39;s taking his course. </span>
      <span id="f1548"> Alas, Siddhartha, I see you suffering, but you&#39;re suffering a pain at which one would like to laugh, at which you&#39;ll soon laugh for yourself.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1549">Siddhartha did not answer. </span>
      <span id="f1550"> He already held the axe in his hands and began to make a raft of bamboo, and Vasudeva helped him to tie the canes together with ropes of grass. </span>
      <span id="f1551"> Then they crossed over, drifted far off their course, pulled the raft upriver on the opposite bank.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1552">&#34;Why did you take the axe along?&#34; asked Siddhartha.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1553">Vasudeva said:  &#34;It might have been possible that the oar of our boat got lost.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1554">But Siddhartha knew what his friend was thinking. </span>
      <span id="f1555"> He thought, the boy would have thrown away or broken the oar in order to get even and in order to keep them from following him. </span>
      <span id="f1556"> And in fact, there was no oar left in the boat. </span>
      <span id="f1557"> Vasudeva pointed to the bottom of the boat and looked at his friend with a smile, as if he wanted to say:  &#34;Don&#39;t you see what your son is trying to tell you? </span>
      <span id="f1558"> Don&#39;t you see that he doesn&#39;t want to be followed?&#34;  But he did not say this in words. </span>
      <span id="f1559"> He started making a new oar. </span>
      <span id="f1560"> But Siddhartha bid his farewell, to look for the run-away. </span>
      <span id="f1561">Vasudeva did not stop him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1562">When Siddhartha had already been walking through the forest for a long time, the thought occurred to him that his search was useless. </span>
      <span id="f1563"> Either, so he thought, the boy was far ahead and had already reached the city, or, if he should still be on his way, he would conceal himself from him, the pursuer. </span>
      <span id="f1564"> As he continued thinking, he also found that he, on his part, was not worried for his son, that he knew deep inside that he had neither perished nor was in any danger in the forest. </span>
      <span id="f1565"> Nevertheless, he ran without stopping, no longer to save him, just to satisfy his desire, just to perhaps see him one more time. </span>
      <span id="f1566"> And he ran up to just outside of the city.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1567">When, near the city, he reached a wide road, he stopped, by the entrance of the beautiful pleasure-garden, which used to belong to Kamala, where he had seen her for the first time in her sedan-chair. </span>
      <span id="f1568"> The past rose up in his soul, again he saw himself standing there, young, a bearded, naked Samana, the hair full of dust. </span>
      <span id="f1569"> For a long time, Siddhartha stood there and looked through the open gate into the garden, seeing monks in yellow robes walking among the beautiful trees.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1570">For a long time, he stood there, pondering, seeing images, listening to the story of his life. </span>
      <span id="f1571"> For a long time, he stood there, looked at the monks, saw young Siddhartha in their place, saw young Kamala walking among the high trees. </span>
      <span id="f1572"> Clearly, he saw himself being served food and drink by Kamala, receiving his first kiss from her, looking proudly and disdainfully back on his Brahmanism, beginning proudly and full of desire his worldly life. </span>
      <span id="f1573"> He saw Kamaswami, saw the servants, the orgies, the gamblers with the dice, the musicians, saw Kamala&#39;s song-bird in the cage, lived through all this once again, breathed Sansara, was once again old and tired, felt once again disgust, felt once again the wish to annihilate himself, was once again healed by the holy Om.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1574">After having been standing by the gate of the garden for a long time, Siddhartha realised that his desire was foolish, which had made him go up to this place, that he could not help his son, that he was not allowed to cling him. </span>
      <span id="f1575"> Deeply, he felt the love for the run-away in his heart, like a wound, and he felt at the same time that this wound had not been given to him in order to turn the knife in it, that it had to become a blossom and had to shine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1576">That this wound did not blossom yet, did not shine yet, at this hour, made him sad. </span>
      <span id="f1577"> Instead of the desired goal, which had drawn him here following the runaway son, there was now emptiness. </span>
      <span id="f1578"> Sadly, he sat down, felt something dying in his heart, experienced emptiness, saw no joy any more, no goal. </span>
      <span id="f1579"> He sat lost in thought and waited. </span>
      <span id="f1580"> This he had learned by the river, this one thing: waiting, having patience, listening attentively. </span>
      <span id="f1581"> And he sat and listened, in the dust of the road, listened to his heart, beating tiredly and sadly, waited for a voice. </span>
      <span id="f1582"> Many an hour he crouched, listening, saw no images any more, fell into emptiness, let himself fall, without seeing a path. </span>
      <span id="f1583"> And when he felt the wound burning, he silently spoke the Om, filled himself with Om. </span>
      <span id="f1584">The monks in the garden saw him, and since he crouched for many hours, and dust was gathering on his gray hair, one of them came to him and placed two bananas in front of him. </span>
      <span id="f1585"> The old man did not see him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1586">From this petrified state, he was awoken by a hand touching his shoulder. </span>
      <span id="f1587"> Instantly, he recognised this touch, this tender, bashful touch, and regained his senses. </span>
      <span id="f1588"> He rose and greeted Vasudeva, who had followed him. </span>
      <span id="f1589"> And when he looked into Vasudeva&#39;s friendly face, into the small wrinkles, which were as if they were filled with nothing but his smile, into the happy eyes, then he smiled too. </span>
      <span id="f1590"> Now he saw the bananas lying in front of him, picked them up, gave one to the ferryman, ate the other one himself. </span>
      <span id="f1591"> After this, he silently went back into the forest with Vasudeva, returned home to the ferry. </span>
      <span id="f1592"> Neither one talked about what had happened today, neither one mentioned the boy&#39;s name, neither one spoke about him running away, neither one spoke about the wound. </span>
      <span id="f1593"> In the hut, Siddhartha lay down on his bed, and when after a while Vasudeva came to him, to offer him a bowl of coconut-milk, he already found him asleep.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>