<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>GOVINDA</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1681">GOVINDA</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1682">Together with other monks, Govinda used to spend the time of rest between pilgrimages in the pleasure-grove, which the courtesan Kamala had given to the followers of Gotama for a gift. </span>
      <span id="f1683"> He heard talk of an old ferryman, who lived one day&#39;s journey away by the river, and who was regarded as a wise man by many. </span>
      <span id="f1684"> When Govinda went back on his way, he chose the path to the ferry, eager to see the ferryman. </span>
      <span id="f1685">Because, though he had lived his entire life by the rules, though he was also looked upon with veneration by the younger monks on account of his age and his modesty, the restlessness and the searching still had not perished from his heart.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1686">He came to the river and asked the old man to ferry him over, and when they got off the boat on the other side, he said to the old man: &#34;You&#39;re very good to us monks and pilgrims, you have already ferried many of us across the river. </span>
      <span id="f1687"> Aren&#39;t you too, ferryman, a searcher for the right path?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1688">Quoth Siddhartha, smiling from his old eyes:  &#34;Do you call yourself a searcher, oh venerable one, though you are already of an old in years and are wearing the robe of Gotama&#39;s monks?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1689">&#34;It&#39;s true, I&#39;m old,&#34; spoke Govinda, &#34;but I haven&#39;t stopped searching. </span>
      <span id="f1690">Never I&#39;ll stop searching, this seems to be my destiny. </span>
      <span id="f1691"> You too, so it seems to me, have been searching. </span>
      <span id="f1692"> Would you like to tell me something, oh honourable one?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1693">Quoth Siddhartha:  &#34;What should I possibly have to tell you, oh venerable one? </span>
      <span id="f1694"> Perhaps that you&#39;re searching far too much? </span>
      <span id="f1695"> That in all that searching, you don&#39;t find the time for finding?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1696">&#34;How come?&#34; asked Govinda.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1697">&#34;When someone is searching,&#34; said Siddhartha, &#34;then it might easily happen that the only thing his eyes still see is that what he searches for, that he is unable to find anything, to let anything enter his mind, because he always thinks of nothing but the object of his search, because he has a goal, because he is obsessed by the goal. </span>
      <span id="f1698"> Searching means: having a goal. </span>
      <span id="f1699"> But finding means: being free, being open, having no goal. </span>
      <span id="f1700"> You, oh venerable one, are perhaps indeed a searcher, because, striving for your goal, there are many things you don&#39;t see, which are directly in front of your eyes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1701">&#34;I don&#39;t quite understand yet,&#34; asked Govinda, &#34;what do you mean by this?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1702">Quoth Siddhartha:  &#34;A long time ago, oh venerable one, many years ago, you&#39;ve once before been at this river and have found a sleeping man by the river, and have sat down with him to guard his sleep. </span>
      <span id="f1703"> But, oh Govinda, you did not recognise the sleeping man.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1704">Astonished, as if he had been the object of a magic spell, the monk looked into the ferryman&#39;s eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1705">&#34;Are you Siddhartha?&#34; he asked with a timid voice. </span>
      <span id="f1706"> &#34;I wouldn&#39;t have recognised you this time as well! </span>
      <span id="f1707"> From my heart, I&#39;m greeting you, Siddhartha; from my heart, I&#39;m happy to see you once again! </span>
      <span id="f1708"> You&#39;ve changed a lot, my friend.--And so you&#39;ve now become a ferryman?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1709">In a friendly manner, Siddhartha laughed. </span>
      <span id="f1710"> &#34;A ferryman, yes. </span>
      <span id="f1711"> Many people, Govinda, have to change a lot, have to wear many a robe, I am one of those, my dear. </span>
      <span id="f1712"> Be welcome, Govinda, and spend the night in my hut.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1713">Govinda stayed the night in the hut and slept on the bed which used to be Vasudeva&#39;s bed. </span>
      <span id="f1714"> Many questions he posed to the friend of his youth, many things Siddhartha had to tell him from his life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1715">When in the next morning the time had come to start the day&#39;s journey, Govinda said, not without hesitation, these words:  &#34;Before I&#39;ll continue on my path, Siddhartha, permit me to ask one more question. </span>
      <span id="f1716">Do you have a teaching? </span>
      <span id="f1717"> Do you have a faith, or a knowledge, you follow, which helps you to live and to do right?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1718">Quoth Siddhartha:  &#34;You know, my dear, that I already as a young man, in those days when we lived with the penitents in the forest, started to distrust teachers and teachings and to turn my back to them. </span>
      <span id="f1719"> I have stuck with this. </span>
      <span id="f1720"> Nevertheless, I have had many teachers since then. </span>
      <span id="f1721"> A beautiful courtesan has been my teacher for a long time, and a rich merchant was my teacher, and some gamblers with dice. </span>
      <span id="f1722"> Once, even a follower of Buddha, travelling on foot, has been my teacher; he sat with me when I had fallen asleep in the forest, on the pilgrimage. </span>
      <span id="f1723"> I&#39;ve also learned from him, I&#39;m also grateful to him, very grateful. </span>
      <span id="f1724"> But most of all, I have learned here from this river and from my predecessor, the ferryman Vasudeva. </span>
      <span id="f1725"> He was a very simple person, Vasudeva, he was no thinker, but he knew what is necessary just as well as Gotama, he was a perfect man, a saint.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1726">Govinda said:  &#34;Still, oh Siddhartha, you love a bit to mock people, as it seems to me. </span>
      <span id="f1727"> I believe in you and know that you haven&#39;t followed a teacher. </span>
      <span id="f1728"> But haven&#39;t you found something by yourself, though you&#39;ve found no teachings, you still found certain thoughts, certain insights, which are your own and which help you to live? </span>
      <span id="f1729"> If you would like to tell me some of these, you would delight my heart.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1730">Quoth Siddhartha:  &#34;I&#39;ve had thoughts, yes, and insight, again and again. </span>
      <span id="f1731"> Sometimes, for an hour or for an entire day, I have felt knowledge in me, as one would feel life in one&#39;s heart. </span>
      <span id="f1732"> There have been many thoughts, but it would be hard for me to convey them to you. </span>
      <span id="f1733">Look, my dear Govinda, this is one of my thoughts, which I have found: wisdom cannot be passed on. </span>
      <span id="f1734"> Wisdom which a wise man tries to pass on to someone always sounds like foolishness.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1735">&#34;Are you kidding?&#34; asked Govinda.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1736">&#34;I&#39;m not kidding. </span>
      <span id="f1737"> I&#39;m telling you what I&#39;ve found. </span>
      <span id="f1738"> Knowledge can be conveyed, but not wisdom. </span>
      <span id="f1739"> It can be found, it can be lived, it is possible to be carried by it, miracles can be performed with it, but it cannot be expressed in words and taught. </span>
      <span id="f1740"> This was what I, even as a young man, sometimes suspected, what has driven me away from the teachers. </span>
      <span id="f1741"> I have found a thought, Govinda, which you&#39;ll again regard as a joke or foolishness, but which is my best thought. </span>
      <span id="f1742"> It says:  The opposite of every truth is just as true! </span>
      <span id="f1743"> That&#39;s like this: any truth can only be expressed and put into words when it is one-sided. </span>
      <span id="f1744">Everything is one-sided which can be thought with thoughts and said with words, it&#39;s all one-sided, all just one half, all lacks completeness, roundness, oneness. </span>
      <span id="f1745"> When the exalted Gotama spoke in his teachings of the world, he had to divide it into Sansara and Nirvana, into deception and truth, into suffering and salvation. </span>
      <span id="f1746"> It cannot be done differently, there is no other way for him who wants to teach. </span>
      <span id="f1747"> But the world itself, what exists around us and inside of us, is never one-sided. </span>
      <span id="f1748"> A person or an act is never entirely Sansara or entirely Nirvana, a person is never entirely holy or entirely sinful. </span>
      <span id="f1749"> It does really seem like this, because we are subject to deception, as if time was something real. </span>
      <span id="f1750">Time is not real, Govinda, I have experienced this often and often again. </span>
      <span id="f1751"> And if time is not real, then the gap which seems to be between the world and the eternity, between suffering and blissfulness, between evil and good, is also a deception.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1752">&#34;How come?&#34; asked Govinda timidly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1753">&#34;Listen well, my dear, listen well! </span>
      <span id="f1754"> The sinner, which I am and which you are, is a sinner, but in times to come he will be Brahma again, he will reach the Nirvana, will be Buddha--and now see: these &#39;times to come&#39; are a deception, are only a parable! </span>
      <span id="f1755"> The sinner is not on his way to become a Buddha, he is not in the process of developing, though our capacity for thinking does not know how else to picture these things. </span>
      <span id="f1756"> No, within the sinner is now and today already the future Buddha, his future is already all there, you have to worship in him, in you, in everyone the Buddha which is coming into being, the possible, the hidden Buddha. </span>
      <span id="f1757"> The world, my friend Govinda, is not imperfect, or on a slow path towards perfection: no, it is perfect in every moment, all sin already carries the divine forgiveness in itself, all small children already have the old person in themselves, all infants already have death, all dying people the eternal life. </span>
      <span id="f1758"> It is not possible for any person to see how far another one has already progressed on his path; in the robber and dice-gambler, the Buddha is waiting; in the Brahman, the robber is waiting. </span>
      <span id="f1759"> In deep meditation, there is the possibility to put time out of existence, to see all life which was, is, and will be as if it was simultaneous, and there everything is good, everything is perfect, everything is Brahman. </span>
      <span id="f1760"> Therefore, I see whatever exists as good, death is to me like life, sin like holiness, wisdom like foolishness, everything has to be as it is, everything only requires my consent, only my willingness, my loving agreement, to be good for me, to do nothing but work for my benefit, to be unable to ever harm me. </span>
      <span id="f1761"> I have experienced on my body and on my soul that I needed sin very much, I needed lust, the desire for possessions, vanity, and needed the most shameful despair, in order to learn how to give up all resistance, in order to learn how to love the world, in order to stop comparing it to some world I wished, I imagined, some kind of perfection I had made up, but to leave it as it is and to love it and to enjoy being a part of it.--These, oh Govinda, are some of the thoughts which have come into my mind.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1762">Siddhartha bent down, picked up a stone from the ground, and weighed it in his hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1763">&#34;This here,&#34; he said playing with it, &#34;is a stone, and will, after a certain time, perhaps turn into soil, and will turn from soil into a plant or animal or human being. </span>
      <span id="f1764"> In the past, I would have said:  This stone is just a stone, it is worthless, it belongs to the world of the Maja; but because it might be able to become also a human being and a spirit in the cycle of transformations, therefore I also grant it importance. </span>
      <span id="f1765"> Thus, I would perhaps have thought in the past. </span>
      <span id="f1766"> But today I think: this stone is a stone, it is also animal, it is also god, it is also Buddha, I do not venerate and love it because it could turn into this or that, but rather because it is already and always everything-- and it is this very fact, that it is a stone, that it appears to me now and today as a stone, this is why I love it and see worth and purpose in each of its veins and cavities, in the yellow, in the gray, in the hardness, in the sound it makes when I knock at it, in the dryness or wetness of its surface. </span>
      <span id="f1767"> There are stones which feel like oil or soap, and others like leaves, others like sand, and every one is special and prays the Om in its own way, each one is Brahman, but simultaneously and just as much it is a stone, is oily or juicy, and this is this very fact which I like and regard as wonderful and worthy of worship.--But let me speak no more of this. </span>
      <span id="f1768"> The words are not good for the secret meaning, everything always becomes a bit different, as soon as it is put into words, gets distorted a bit, a bit silly--yes, and this is also very good, and I like it a lot, I also very much agree with this, that this what is one man&#39;s treasure and wisdom always sounds like foolishness to another person.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1769">Govinda listened silently.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1770">&#34;Why have you told me this about the stone?&#34; he asked hesitantly after a pause.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1771">&#34;I did it without any specific intention. </span>
      <span id="f1772"> Or perhaps what I meant was, that love this very stone, and the river, and all these things we are looking at and from which we can learn. </span>
      <span id="f1773"> I can love a stone, Govinda, and also a tree or a piece of bark. </span>
      <span id="f1774"> This are things, and things can be loved. </span>
      <span id="f1775"> But I cannot love words. </span>
      <span id="f1776"> Therefore, teachings are no good for me, they have no hardness, no softness, no colours, no edges, no smell, no taste, they have nothing but words. </span>
      <span id="f1777"> Perhaps it are these which keep you from finding peace, perhaps it are the many words. </span>
      <span id="f1778"> Because salvation and virtue as well, Sansara and Nirvana as well, are mere words, Govinda. </span>
      <span id="f1779"> There is no thing which would be Nirvana; there is just the word Nirvana.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1780">Quoth Govinda:  &#34;Not just a word, my friend, is Nirvana. </span>
      <span id="f1781"> It is a thought.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1782">Siddhartha continued:  &#34;A thought, it might be so. </span>
      <span id="f1783"> I must confess to you, my dear: I don&#39;t differentiate much between thoughts and words. </span>
      <span id="f1784">To be honest, I also have no high opinion of thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f1785"> I have a better opinion of things. </span>
      <span id="f1786"> Here on this ferry-boat, for instance, a man has been my predecessor and teacher, a holy man, who has for many years simply believed in the river, nothing else. </span>
      <span id="f1787"> He had noticed that the river&#39;s spoke to him, he learned from it, it educated and taught him, the river seemed to be a god to him, for many years he did not know that every wind, every cloud, every bird, every beetle was just as divine and knows just as much and can teach just as much as the worshipped river. </span>
      <span id="f1788">But when this holy man went into the forests, he knew everything, knew more than you and me, without teachers, without books, only because he had believed in the river.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1789">Govinda said:  &#34;But is that what you call `things&#39;, actually something real, something which has existence? </span>
      <span id="f1790"> Isn&#39;t it just a deception of the Maja, just an image and illusion? </span>
      <span id="f1791"> Your stone, your tree, your river-- are they actually a reality?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1792">&#34;This too,&#34; spoke Siddhartha, &#34;I do not care very much about. </span>
      <span id="f1793"> Let the things be illusions or not, after all I would then also be an illusion, and thus they are always like me. </span>
      <span id="f1794"> This is what makes them so dear and worthy of veneration for me: they are like me. </span>
      <span id="f1795"> Therefore, I can love them. </span>
      <span id="f1796"> And this is now a teaching you will laugh about: love, oh Govinda, seems to me to be the most important thing of all. </span>
      <span id="f1797"> To thoroughly understand the world, to explain it, to despise it, may be the thing great thinkers do. </span>
      <span id="f1798"> But I&#39;m only interested in being able to love the world, not to despise it, not to hate it and me, to be able to look upon it and me and all beings with love and admiration and great respect.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1799">&#34;This I understand,&#34; spoke Govinda. </span>
      <span id="f1800"> &#34;But this very thing was discovered by the exalted one to be a deception. </span>
      <span id="f1801"> He commands benevolence, clemency, sympathy, tolerance, but not love; he forbade us to tie our heart in love to earthly things.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1802">&#34;I know it,&#34; said Siddhartha; his smile shone golden. </span>
      <span id="f1803"> &#34;I know it, Govinda. </span>
      <span id="f1804"> And behold, with this we are right in the middle of the thicket of opinions, in the dispute about words. </span>
      <span id="f1805"> For I cannot deny, my words of love are in a contradiction, a seeming contradiction with Gotama&#39;s words. </span>
      <span id="f1806"> For this very reason, I distrust in words so much, for I know, this contradiction is a deception. </span>
      <span id="f1807"> I know that I am in agreement with Gotama. </span>
      <span id="f1808"> How should he not know love, he, who has discovered all elements of human existence in their transitoriness, in their meaninglessness, and yet loved people thus much, to use a long, laborious life only to help them, to teach them! </span>
      <span id="f1809"> Even with him, even with your great teacher, I prefer the thing over the words, place more importance on his acts and life than on his speeches, more on the gestures of his hand than his opinions. </span>
      <span id="f1810"> Not in his speech, not in his thoughts, I see his greatness, only in his actions, in his life.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1811">For a long time, the two old men said nothing. </span>
      <span id="f1812"> Then spoke Govinda, while bowing for a farewell:  &#34;I thank you, Siddhartha, for telling me some of your thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f1813"> They are partially strange thoughts, not all have been instantly understandable to me. </span>
      <span id="f1814"> This being as it may, I thank you, and I wish you to have calm days.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1815">(But secretly he thought to himself:  This Siddhartha is a bizarre person, he expresses bizarre thoughts, his teachings sound foolish. </span>
      <span id="f1816">So differently sound the exalted one&#39;s pure teachings, clearer, purer, more comprehensible, nothing strange, foolish, or silly is contained in them. </span>
      <span id="f1817"> But different from his thoughts seemed to me Siddhartha&#39;s hands and feet, his eyes, his forehead, his breath, his smile, his greeting, his walk. </span>
      <span id="f1818"> Never again, after our exalted Gotama has become one with the Nirvana, never since then have I met a person of whom I felt: this is a holy man! </span>
      <span id="f1819"> Only him, this Siddhartha, I have found to be like this. </span>
      <span id="f1820"> May his teachings be strange, may his words sound foolish; out of his gaze and his hand, his skin and his hair, out of every part of him shines a purity, shines a calmness, shines a cheerfulness and mildness and holiness, which I have seen in no other person since the final death of our exalted teacher.)</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1821">As Govinda thought like this, and there was a conflict in his heart, he once again bowed to Siddhartha, drawn by love. </span>
      <span id="f1822"> Deeply he bowed to him who was calmly sitting.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1823">&#34;Siddhartha,&#34; he spoke, &#34;we have become old men. </span>
      <span id="f1824"> It is unlikely for one of us to see the other again in this incarnation. </span>
      <span id="f1825"> I see, beloved, that you have found peace. </span>
      <span id="f1826"> I confess that I haven&#39;t found it. </span>
      <span id="f1827"> Tell me, oh honourable one, one more word, give me something on my way which I can grasp, which I can understand! </span>
      <span id="f1828"> Give me something to be with me on my path. </span>
      <span id="f1829"> It is often hard, my path, often dark, Siddhartha.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1830">Siddhartha said nothing and looked at him with the ever unchanged, quiet smile. </span>
      <span id="f1831"> Govinda stared at his face, with fear, with yearning, suffering, and the eternal search was visible in his look, eternal not-finding.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1832">Siddhartha saw it and smiled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1833">&#34;Bend down to me!&#34; he whispered quietly in Govinda&#39;s ear. </span>
      <span id="f1834"> &#34;Bend down to me! </span>
      <span id="f1835"> Like this, even closer! </span>
      <span id="f1836"> Very close! </span>
      <span id="f1837"> Kiss my forehead, Govinda!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1838">But while Govinda with astonishment, and yet drawn by great love and expectation, obeyed his words, bent down closely to him and touched his forehead with his lips, something miraculous happened to him. </span>
      <span id="f1839"> While his thoughts were still dwelling on Siddhartha&#39;s wondrous words, while he was still struggling in vain and with reluctance to think away time, to imagine Nirvana and Sansara as one, while even a certain contempt for the words of his friend was fighting in him against an immense love and veneration, this happened to him:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1840">He no longer saw the face of his friend Siddhartha, instead he saw other faces, many, a long sequence, a flowing river of faces, of hundreds, of thousands, which all came and disappeared, and yet all seemed to be there simultaneously, which all constantly changed and renewed themselves, and which were still all Siddhartha. </span>
      <span id="f1841"> He saw the face of a fish, a carp, with an infinitely painfully opened mouth, the face of a dying fish, with fading eyes--he saw the face of a new-born child, red and full of wrinkles, distorted from crying--he saw the face of a murderer, he saw him plunging a knife into the body of another person--he saw, in the same second, this criminal in bondage, kneeling and his head being chopped off by the executioner with one blow of his sword--he saw the bodies of men and women, naked in positions and cramps of frenzied love--he saw corpses stretched out, motionless, cold, void-- he saw the heads of animals, of boars, of crocodiles, of elephants, of bulls, of birds--he saw gods, saw Krishna, saw Agni--he saw all of these figures and faces in a thousand relationships with one another, each one helping the other, loving it, hating it, destroying it, giving re-birth to it, each one was a will to die, a passionately painful confession of transitoriness, and yet none of them died, each one only transformed, was always re-born, received evermore a new face, without any time having passed between the one and the other face--and all of these figures and faces rested, flowed, generated themselves, floated along and merged with each other, and they were all constantly covered by something thin, without individuality of its own, but yet existing, like a thin glass or ice, like a transparent skin, a shell or mold or mask of water, and this mask was smiling, and this mask was Siddhartha&#39;s smiling face, which he, Govinda, in this very same moment touched with his lips. </span>
      <span id="f1842">And, Govinda saw it like this, this smile of the mask, this smile of oneness above the flowing forms, this smile of simultaneousness above the thousand births and deaths, this smile of Siddhartha was precisely the same, was precisely of the same kind as the quiet, delicate, impenetrable, perhaps benevolent, perhaps mocking, wise, thousand-fold smile of Gotama, the Buddha, as he had seen it himself with great respect a hundred times. </span>
      <span id="f1843"> Like this, Govinda knew, the perfected ones are smiling.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1844">Not knowing any more whether time existed, whether the vision had lasted a second or a hundred years, not knowing any more whether there existed a Siddhartha, a Gotama, a me and a you, feeling in his innermost self as if he had been wounded by a divine arrow, the injury of which tasted sweet, being enchanted and dissolved in his innermost self, Govinda still stood for a little while bent over Siddhartha&#39;s quiet face, which he had just kissed, which had just been the scene of all manifestations, all transformations, all existence. </span>
      <span id="f1845"> The face was unchanged, after under its surface the depth of the thousandfoldness had closed up again, he smiled silently, smiled quietly and softly, perhaps very benevolently, perhaps very mockingly, precisely as he used to smile, the exalted one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1846">Deeply, Govinda bowed; tears he knew nothing of, ran down his old face; like a fire burnt the feeling of the most intimate love, the humblest veneration in his heart. </span>
      <span id="f1847"> Deeply, he bowed, touching the ground, before him who was sitting motionlessly, whose smile reminded him of everything he had ever loved in his life, what had ever been valuable and holy to him in his life.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>