<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER I.</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f004">CHAPTER I.</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f005">One morning, as Gregor Samsa was waking up from anxious dreams, he discovered that in bed he had been changed into a monstrous verminous bug. </span>
      <span id="f006">He lay on his armour-hard back and saw, as he lifted his head up a little, his brown, arched abdomen divided up into rigid bow-like sections. </span>
      <span id="f007">From this height the blanket, just about ready to slide off completely, could hardly stay in place. </span>
      <span id="f008">His numerous legs, pitifully thin in comparison to the rest of his circumference, flickered helplessly before his eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f009">&#34;What&#39;s happened to me,&#34; he thought. </span>
      <span id="f010">It was no dream. </span>
      <span id="f011">His room, a proper room for a human being, only somewhat too small, lay quietly between the four well-known walls. </span>
      <span id="f012">Above the table, on which an unpacked collection of sample cloth goods was spread out—Samsa was a travelling salesman—hung the picture which he had cut out of an illustrated magazine a little while ago and set in a pretty gilt frame. </span>
      <span id="f013">It was a picture of a woman with a fur hat and a fur boa. </span>
      <span id="f014">She sat erect there, lifting up in the direction of the viewer a solid fur muff into which her entire forearm had disappeared.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f015">Gregor&#39;s glance then turned to the window. </span>
      <span id="f016">The dreary weather—the rain drops were falling audibly down on the metal window ledge—made him quite melancholy. </span>
      <span id="f017">&#34;Why don&#39;t I keep sleeping for a little while longer and forget all this foolishness,&#34; he thought. </span>
      <span id="f018">But this was entirely impractical, for he was used to sleeping on his right side, and in his present state he couldn&#39;t get himself into this position. </span>
      <span id="f019">No matter how hard he threw himself onto his right side, he always rolled again onto his back. </span>
      <span id="f020">He must have tried it a hundred times, closing his eyes so that he would not have to see the wriggling legs, and gave up only when he began to feel a light, dull pain in his side which he had never felt before.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f021">&#34;O God,&#34; he thought, &#34;what a demanding job I&#39;ve chosen! </span>
      <span id="f022">Day in, day out, on the road. </span>
      <span id="f023">The stresses of selling are much greater than the work going on at head office, and, in addition to that, I have to cope with the problems of travelling, the worries about train connections, irregular bad food, temporary and constantly changing human relationships, which never come from the heart. </span>
      <span id="f024">To hell with it all!&#34; He felt a slight itching on the top of his abdomen. </span>
      <span id="f025">He slowly pushed himself on his back closer to the bed post so that he could lift his head more easily, found the itchy part, which was entirely covered with small white spots—he did not know what to make of them and wanted to feel the place with a leg. </span>
      <span id="f026">But he retracted it immediately, for the contact felt like a cold shower all over him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f027">He slid back again into his earlier position. </span>
      <span id="f028">&#34;This getting up early,&#34; he thought, &#34;makes a man quite idiotic. </span>
      <span id="f029">A man must have his sleep. </span>
      <span id="f030">Other travelling salesmen live like harem women. </span>
      <span id="f031">For instance, when I come back to the inn during the course of the morning to write up the necessary orders, these gentlemen are just sitting down to breakfast. </span>
      <span id="f032">If I were to try that with my boss, I&#39;d be thrown out on the spot. </span>
      <span id="f033">Still, who knows whether that mightn&#39;t be really good for me? </span>
      <span id="f034">If I didn&#39;t hold back for my parents&#39; sake, I&#39;d have quit ages ago. </span>
      <span id="f035">I would&#39;ve gone to the boss and told him just what I think from the bottom of my heart. </span>
      <span id="f036">He would&#39;ve fallen right off his desk! </span>
      <span id="f037">How weird it is to sit up at that desk and talk down to the employee from way up there. </span>
      <span id="f038">The boss has trouble hearing, so the employee has to step up quite close to him. </span>
      <span id="f039">Anyway, I haven&#39;t completely given up that hope yet. </span>
      <span id="f040">Once I&#39;ve got together the money to pay off my parents&#39; debt to him—that should take another five or six years—I&#39;ll do it for sure. </span>
      <span id="f041">Then I&#39;ll make the big break. </span>
      <span id="f042">In any case, right now I have to get up. </span>
      <span id="f043">My train leaves at five o&#39;clock.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f044">He looked over at the alarm clock ticking away by the chest of drawers. </span>
      <span id="f045">&#34;Good God!&#34; he thought. </span>
      <span id="f046">It was half past six, and the hands were going quietly on. </span>
      <span id="f047">It was past the half hour, already nearly quarter to. </span>
      <span id="f048">Could the alarm have failed to ring? </span>
      <span id="f049">One saw from the bed that it was properly set for four o&#39;clock. </span>
      <span id="f050">Certainly it had rung. </span>
      <span id="f051">Yes, but was it possible to sleep through that noise which made the furniture shake? </span>
      <span id="f052">Now, it&#39;s true he&#39;d not slept quietly, but evidently he&#39;d slept all the more deeply. </span>
      <span id="f053">Still, what should he do now? </span>
      <span id="f054">The next train left at seven o&#39;clock. </span>
      <span id="f055">To catch that one, he would have to go in a mad rush. </span>
      <span id="f056">The sample collection wasn&#39;t packed up yet, and he really didn&#39;t feel particularly fresh and active. </span>
      <span id="f057">And even if he caught the train, there was no avoiding a blow-up with the boss, because the firm&#39;s errand boy would&#39;ve waited for the five o&#39;clock train and reported the news of his absence long ago. </span>
      <span id="f058">He was the boss&#39;s minion, without backbone or intelligence. </span>
      <span id="f059">Well then, what if he reported in sick? </span>
      <span id="f060">But that would be extremely embarrassing and suspicious, because during his five years&#39; service Gregor hadn&#39;t been sick even once. </span>
      <span id="f061">The boss would certainly come with the doctor from the health insurance company and would reproach his parents for their lazy son and cut short all objections with the insurance doctor&#39;s comments; for him everyone was completely healthy but really lazy about work. </span>
      <span id="f062">And besides, would the doctor in this case be totally wrong? </span>
      <span id="f063">Apart from a really excessive drowsiness after the long sleep, Gregor in fact felt quite well and even had a really strong appetite.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f064">As he was thinking all this over in the greatest haste, without being able to make the decision to get out of bed—the alarm clock was indicating exactly quarter to seven—there was a cautious knock on the door by the head of the bed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f065">&#34;Gregor,&#34; a voice called—it was his mother!—&#34;it&#39;s quarter to seven. </span>
      <span id="f066">Don&#39;t you want to be on your way?&#34; The soft voice! </span>
      <span id="f067">Gregor was startled when he heard his voice answering. </span>
      <span id="f068">It was clearly and unmistakably his earlier voice, but in it was intermingled, as if from below, an irrepressibly painful squeaking, which left the words positively distinct only in the first moment and distorted them in the reverberation, so that one didn&#39;t know if one had heard correctly. </span>
      <span id="f069">Gregor wanted to answer in detail and explain everything, but in these circumstances he confined himself to saying, &#34;Yes, yes, thank you mother. </span>
      <span id="f070">I&#39;m getting up right away.&#34; Because of the wooden door the change in Gregor&#39;s voice was not really noticeable outside, so his mother calmed down with this explanation and shuffled off. </span>
      <span id="f071">However, as a result of the short conversation, the other family members became aware that Gregor was unexpectedly still at home, and already his father was knocking on one side door, weakly but with his fist. </span>
      <span id="f072">&#34;Gregor, Gregor,&#34; he called out, &#34;what&#39;s going on?&#34; And, after a short while, he urged him on again in a deeper voice: &#34;Gregor!&#34; Gregor!&#34; At the other side door, however, his sister knocked lightly. </span>
      <span id="f073">&#34;Gregor? </span>
      <span id="f074">Are you all right? </span>
      <span id="f075">Do you need anything?&#34; Gregor directed answers in both directions, &#34;I&#39;ll be ready right away.&#34; He made an effort with the most careful articulation and by inserting long pauses between the individual words to remove everything remarkable from his voice. </span>
      <span id="f076">His father turned back to his breakfast. </span>
      <span id="f077">However, the sister whispered, &#34;Gregor, open the door—I beg you.&#34; Gregor had no intention of opening the door, but congratulated himself on his precaution, acquired from travelling, of locking all doors during the night, even at home.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f078">First he wanted to stand up quietly and undisturbed, get dressed, above all have breakfast, and only then consider further action, for—he noticed this clearly—by thinking things over in bed he would not reach a reasonable conclusion. </span>
      <span id="f079">He remembered that he had already often felt a light pain or other in bed, perhaps the result of an awkward lying position, which later turned out to be purely imaginary when he stood up, and he was eager to see how his present fantasies would gradually dissipate. </span>
      <span id="f080">That the change in his voice was nothing other than the onset of a real chill, an occupational illness of commercial travellers, of that he had not the slightest doubt.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f081">It was very easy to throw aside the blanket. </span>
      <span id="f082">He needed only to push himself up a little, and it fell by itself. </span>
      <span id="f083">But to continue was difficult, particularly because he was so unusually wide. </span>
      <span id="f084">He needed arms and hands to push himself upright. </span>
      <span id="f085">Instead of these, however, he had only many small limbs which were incessantly moving with very different motions and which, in addition, he was unable to control. </span>
      <span id="f086">If he wanted to bend one of them, then it was the first to extend itself, and if he finally succeeded doing what he wanted with this limb, in the meantime all the others, as if left free, moved around in an excessively painful agitation. </span>
      <span id="f087">&#34;But I must not stay in bed uselessly,&#34; said Gregor to himself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f088">At first he wanted to get out of bed with the lower part of his body, but this lower part—which, by the way, he had not yet looked at and which he also couldn&#39;t picture clearly—proved itself too difficult to move. </span>
      <span id="f089">The attempt went so slowly. </span>
      <span id="f090">When, having become almost frantic, he finally hurled himself forward with all his force and without thinking, he chose his direction incorrectly, and he hit the lower bedpost hard. </span>
      <span id="f091">The violent pain he felt revealed to him that the lower part of his body was at the moment probably the most sensitive.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f092">Thus, he tried to get his upper body out of the bed first and turned his head carefully toward the edge of the bed. </span>
      <span id="f093">He managed to do this easily, and in spite of its width and weight his body mass at last slowly followed the turning of his head. </span>
      <span id="f094">But as he finally raised his head outside the bed in the open air, he became anxious about moving forward any further in this manner, for if he allowed himself eventually to fall by this process, it would take a miracle to prevent his head from getting injured. </span>
      <span id="f095">And at all costs he must not lose consciousness right now. </span>
      <span id="f096">He preferred to remain in bed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f097">However, after a similar effort, while he lay there again, sighing as before, and once again saw his small limbs fighting one another, if anything worse than earlier, and didn&#39;t see any chance of imposing quiet and order on this arbitrary movement, he told himself again that he couldn&#39;t possibly remain in bed and that it might be the most reasonable thing to sacrifice everything if there was even the slightest hope of getting himself out of bed in the process. </span>
      <span id="f098">At the same moment, however, he didn&#39;t forget to remind himself from time to time of the fact that calm—indeed the calmest—reflection might be better than the most confused decisions. </span>
      <span id="f099">At such moments, he directed his gaze as precisely as he could toward the window, but unfortunately there was little confident cheer to be had from a glance at the morning mist, which concealed even the other side of the narrow street. </span>
      <span id="f100">&#34;It&#39;s already seven o&#39;clock,&#34; he told himself at the latest striking of the alarm clock, &#34;already seven o&#39;clock and still such a fog.&#34; And for a little while longer he lay quietly with weak breathing, as if perhaps waiting for normal and natural conditions to re-emerge out of the complete stillness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f101">But then he said to himself, &#34;Before it strikes a quarter past seven, whatever happens I must be completely out of bed. </span>
      <span id="f102">Besides, by then someone from the office will arrive to inquire about me, because the office will open before seven o&#39;clock.&#34; And he made an effort then to rock his entire body length out of the bed with a uniform motion. </span>
      <span id="f103">If he let himself fall out of the bed in this way, his head, which in the course of the fall he intended to lift up sharply, would probably remain uninjured. </span>
      <span id="f104">His back seemed to be hard; nothing would really happen to that as a result of the fall. </span>
      <span id="f105">His greatest reservation was a worry about the loud noise which the fall must create and which presumably would arouse, if not fright, then at least concern on the other side of all the doors. </span>
      <span id="f106">However, it had to be tried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f107">As Gregor was in the process of lifting himself half out of bed—the new method was more of a game than an effort; he needed only to rock with a constant rhythm—it struck him how easy all this would be if someone were to come to his aid. </span>
      <span id="f108">Two strong people—he thought of his father and the servant girl—would have been quite sufficient. </span>
      <span id="f109">They would have only had to push their arms under his arched back to get him out of the bed, to bend down with their load, and then merely to exercise patience and care that he completed the flip onto the floor, where his diminutive legs would then, he hoped, acquire a purpose. </span>
      <span id="f110">Now, quite apart from the fact that the doors were locked, should he really call out for help? </span>
      <span id="f111">In spite of all his distress, he was unable to suppress a smile at this idea.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f112">He had already got to the point where, by rocking more strongly, he maintained his equilibrium with difficulty, and very soon he would finally have to decide, for in five minutes it would be a quarter past seven. </span>
      <span id="f113">Then there was a ring at the door of the apartment. </span>
      <span id="f114">&#34;That&#39;s someone from the office,&#34; he told himself, and he almost froze while his small limbs only danced around all the faster. </span>
      <span id="f115">For one moment everything remained still. </span>
      <span id="f116">&#34;They aren&#39;t opening,&#34; Gregor said to himself, caught up in some absurd hope. </span>
      <span id="f117">But of course then, as usual, the servant girl with her firm tread went to the door and opened it. </span>
      <span id="f118">Gregor needed to hear only the first word of the visitor&#39;s greeting to recognize immediately who it was, the manager himself. </span>
      <span id="f119">Why was Gregor the only one condemned to work in a firm where, at the slightest lapse, someone immediately attracted the greatest suspicion? </span>
      <span id="f120">Were all the employees then collectively, one and all, scoundrels? </span>
      <span id="f121">Among them was there then no truly devoted person who, if he failed to use just a couple of hours in the morning for office work, would become abnormal from pangs of conscience and really be in no state to get out of bed? </span>
      <span id="f122">Was it really not enough to let an apprentice make inquiries, if such questioning was even necessary? </span>
      <span id="f123">Must the manager himself come, and in the process must it be demonstrated to the entire innocent family that the investigation of this suspicious circumstance could be entrusted only to the intelligence of the manager? </span>
      <span id="f124">And more as a consequence of the excited state in which this idea put Gregor than as a result of an actual decision, he swung himself with all his might out of the bed. </span>
      <span id="f125">There was a loud thud, but not a real crash. </span>
      <span id="f126">The fall was absorbed somewhat by the carpet and, in addition, his back was more elastic than Gregor had thought. </span>
      <span id="f127">For that reason the dull noise was not quite so conspicuous. </span>
      <span id="f128">But he had not held his head up with sufficient care and had hit it. </span>
      <span id="f129">He turned his head, irritated and in pain, and rubbed it on the carpet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f130">&#34;Something has fallen in there,&#34; said the manager in the next room on the left. </span>
      <span id="f131">Gregor tried to imagine to himself whether anything similar to what was happening to him today could have also happened at some point to the manager. </span>
      <span id="f132">At least one had to concede the possibility of such a thing. </span>
      <span id="f133">However, as if to give a rough answer to this question, the manager now, with a squeak of his polished boots, took a few determined steps in the next room. </span>
      <span id="f134">From the neighbouring room on the right the sister was whispering to inform Gregor: &#34;Gregor, the manager is here.&#34; &#34;I know,&#34; said Gregor to himself. </span>
      <span id="f135">But he did not dare make his voice loud enough so that his sister could hear.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f136">&#34;Gregor,&#34; his father now said from the neighbouring room on the left, &#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f137">Manager has come and is asking why you have not left on the early train. </span>
      <span id="f138">We don&#39;t know what we should tell him. </span>
      <span id="f139">Besides, he also wants to speak to you personally. </span>
      <span id="f140">So please open the door. </span>
      <span id="f141">He will be good enough to forgive the mess in your room.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f142">In the middle of all this, the manager called out in a friendly way, &#34;Good morning, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f143">Samsa.&#34; &#34;He is not well,&#34; said his mother to the manager, while his father was still talking at the door, &#34;He is not well, believe me, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f144">Manager. </span>
      <span id="f145">Otherwise how would Gregor miss a train? </span>
      <span id="f146">The young man has nothing in his head except business. </span>
      <span id="f147">I&#39;m almost angry that he never goes out at night. </span>
      <span id="f148">Right now he&#39;s been in the city eight days, but he&#39;s been at home every evening. </span>
      <span id="f149">He sits here with us at the table and reads the newspaper quietly or studies his travel schedules. </span>
      <span id="f150">It&#39;s a quite a diversion for him to busy himself with fretwork. </span>
      <span id="f151">For instance, he cut out a small frame over the course of two or three evenings. </span>
      <span id="f152">You&#39;d be amazed how pretty it is. </span>
      <span id="f153">It&#39;s hanging right inside the room. </span>
      <span id="f154">You&#39;ll see it immediately, as soon as Gregor opens the door. </span>
      <span id="f155">Anyway, I&#39;m happy that you&#39;re here, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f156">Manager. </span>
      <span id="f157">By ourselves, we would never have made Gregor open the door. </span>
      <span id="f158">He&#39;s so stubborn, and he&#39;s certainly not well, although he denied that this morning.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f159">&#34;I&#39;m coming right away,&#34; said Gregor slowly and deliberately and didn&#39;t move, so as not to lose one word of the conversation. </span>
      <span id="f160">&#34;My dear lady, I cannot explain it to myself in any other way,&#34; said the manager; &#34;I hope it is nothing serious. </span>
      <span id="f161">On the other hand, I must also say that we business people, luckily or unluckily, however one looks at it, very often simply have to overcome a slight indisposition for business reasons.&#34; &#34;So can Mr. </span>
      <span id="f162">Manager come in to see you now?&#34; asked his father impatiently and knocked once again on the door. </span>
      <span id="f163">&#34;No,&#34; said Gregor. </span>
      <span id="f164">In the neighbouring room on the left a painful stillness descended. </span>
      <span id="f165">In the neighbouring room on the right the sister began to sob.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f166">Why didn&#39;t his sister go to the others? </span>
      <span id="f167">She&#39;d probably just gotten up out of bed now and hadn&#39;t even started to get dressed yet. </span>
      <span id="f168">Then why was she crying? </span>
      <span id="f169">Because he wasn&#39;t getting up and wasn&#39;t letting the manager in, because he was in danger of losing his position, and because then his boss would badger his parents once again with the old demands? </span>
      <span id="f170">Those were probably unnecessary worries right now. </span>
      <span id="f171">Gregor was still here and wasn&#39;t thinking at all about abandoning his family. </span>
      <span id="f172">At the moment he was lying right there on the carpet, and no one who knew about his condition would&#39;ve seriously demanded that he let the manager in. </span>
      <span id="f173">But Gregor wouldn&#39;t be casually dismissed right way because of this small discourtesy, for which he would find an easy and suitable excuse later on. </span>
      <span id="f174">It seemed to Gregor that it might be far more reasonable to leave him in peace at the moment, instead of disturbing him with crying and conversation. </span>
      <span id="f175">But it was the very uncertainty which distressed the others and excused their behaviour.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f176">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f177">Samsa,&#34; the manager was now shouting, his voice raised, &#34;what&#39;s the matter? </span>
      <span id="f178">You are barricading yourself in your room, answer with only a yes and a no, are making serious and unnecessary troubles for your parents, and neglecting (I mention this only incidentally) your commercial duties in a truly unheard of manner. </span>
      <span id="f179">I am speaking here in the name of your parents and your employer, and I am requesting you in all seriousness for an immediate and clear explanation. </span>
      <span id="f180">I am amazed. </span>
      <span id="f181">I am amazed. </span>
      <span id="f182">I thought I knew you as a calm, reasonable person, and now you appear suddenly to want to start parading around in weird moods. </span>
      <span id="f183">The Chief indicated to me earlier this very day a possible explanation for your neglect--it concerned the collection of cash entrusted to you a short while ago--but in truth I almost gave him my word of honour that this explanation could not be correct. </span>
      <span id="f184">However, now I see here your unimaginable pig headedness, and I am totally losing any desire to speak up for you in the slightest. </span>
      <span id="f185">And your position is not at all the most secure. </span>
      <span id="f186">Originally I intended to mention all this to you privately, but since you are letting me waste my time here uselessly, I don&#39;t know why the matter shouldn&#39;t come to the attention of your parents. </span>
      <span id="f187">Your productivity has also been very unsatisfactory recently. </span>
      <span id="f188">Of course, it&#39;s not the time of year to conduct exceptional business, we recognize that, but a time of year for conducting no business, there is no such thing at all, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f189">Samsa, and such a thing must never be.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f190">&#34;But Mr. </span>
      <span id="f191">Manager,&#34; called Gregor, beside himself and, in his agitation, forgetting everything else, &#34;I&#39;m opening the door immediately, this very moment. </span>
      <span id="f192">A slight indisposition, a dizzy spell, has prevented me from getting up. </span>
      <span id="f193">I&#39;m still lying in bed right now. </span>
      <span id="f194">But I&#39;m quite refreshed once again. </span>
      <span id="f195">I&#39;m in the midst of getting out of bed. </span>
      <span id="f196">Just have patience for a short moment! </span>
      <span id="f197">Things are not going as well as I thought. </span>
      <span id="f198">But things are all right. </span>
      <span id="f199">How suddenly this can overcome someone! </span>
      <span id="f200">Only yesterday evening everything was fine with me. </span>
      <span id="f201">My parents certainly know that. </span>
      <span id="f202">Actually just yesterday evening I had a small premonition. </span>
      <span id="f203">People must have seen that in me. </span>
      <span id="f204">Why have I not reported that to the office? </span>
      <span id="f205">But people always think that they&#39;ll get over sickness without having to stay at home. </span>
      <span id="f206">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f207">Manager! </span>
      <span id="f208">Take it easy on my parents! </span>
      <span id="f209">There is really no basis for the criticisms which you&#39;re now making against me, and really nobody has said a word to me about that. </span>
      <span id="f210">Perhaps you have not read the latest orders which I shipped. </span>
      <span id="f211">Besides, now I&#39;m setting out on my trip on the eight o&#39;clock train; the few hours&#39; rest have made me stronger. </span>
      <span id="f212">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f213">Manager, do not stay. </span>
      <span id="f214">I will be at the office in person right away. </span>
      <span id="f215">Please have the goodness to say that and to convey my respects to the Chief.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f216">While Gregor was quickly blurting all this out, hardly aware of what he was saying, he had moved close to the chest of drawers without effort, probably as a result of the practice he had already had in bed, and now he was trying to raise himself up on it. </span>
      <span id="f217">Actually, he wanted to open the door. </span>
      <span id="f218">He really wanted to let himself be seen by and to speak with the manager. </span>
      <span id="f219">He was keen to witness what the others now asking about him would say when they saw him. </span>
      <span id="f220">If they were startled, then Gregor had no more responsibility and could be calm. </span>
      <span id="f221">But if they accepted everything quietly, then he would have no reason to get excited and, if he got a move on, could really be at the station around eight o&#39;clock.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f222">At first he slid down a few times on the smooth chest of drawers. </span>
      <span id="f223">But at last he gave himself a final swing and stood upright there. </span>
      <span id="f224">He was no longer at all aware of the pains in his lower body, no matter how they might still sting. </span>
      <span id="f225">Now he let himself fall against the back of a nearby chair, on the edge of which he braced himself with his thin limbs. </span>
      <span id="f226">By doing this he gained control over himself and kept quiet, for he could now hear the manager.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f227">&#34;Did you understood a single word?&#34; the manager asked the parents, &#34;Is he playing the fool with us?&#34; &#34;For God&#39;s sake,&#34; cried the mother already in tears, &#34;perhaps he&#39;s very ill and we&#39;re upsetting him. </span>
      <span id="f228">Grete! </span>
      <span id="f229">Grete!&#34; she yelled at that point. </span>
      <span id="f230">&#34;Mother?&#34; called the sister from the other side. </span>
      <span id="f231">They were making themselves understood through Gregor&#39;s room. </span>
      <span id="f232">&#34;You must go to the doctor right away. </span>
      <span id="f233">Gregor is sick. </span>
      <span id="f234">Hurry to the doctor. </span>
      <span id="f235">Have you heard Gregor speak yet?&#34; &#34;That was an animal&#39;s voice,&#34; said the manager, remarkably quietly in comparison to the mother&#39;s cries.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f236">&#34;Anna! </span>
      <span id="f237">Anna!&#39; yelled the father through the hall into the kitchen, clapping his hands, &#34;fetch a locksmith right away!&#34; The two young women were already running through the hall with swishing skirts—how had his sister dressed herself so quickly?—and yanked open the doors of the apartment. </span>
      <span id="f238">One couldn&#39;t hear the doors closing at all. </span>
      <span id="f239">They probably had left them open, as is customary in an apartment where a huge misfortune has taken place.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f240">However, Gregor had become much calmer. </span>
      <span id="f241">All right, people did not understand his words any more, although they seemed clear enough to him, clearer than previously, perhaps because his ears had gotten used to them. </span>
      <span id="f242">But at least people now thought that things were not all right with him and were prepared to help him. </span>
      <span id="f243">The confidence and assurance with which the first arrangements had been carried out made him feel good. </span>
      <span id="f244">He felt himself included once again in the circle of humanity and was expecting from both the doctor and the locksmith, without differentiating between them with any real precision, splendid and surprising results. </span>
      <span id="f245">In order to get as clear a voice as possible for the critical conversation which was imminent, he coughed a little, and certainly took the trouble to do this in a really subdued way, since it was possible that even this noise sounded like something different from a human cough. </span>
      <span id="f246">He no longer trusted himself to decide any more. </span>
      <span id="f247">Meanwhile in the next room it had become really quiet. </span>
      <span id="f248">Perhaps his parents were sitting with the manager at the table whispering; perhaps they were all leaning against the door listening.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f249">Gregor pushed himself slowly towards the door, with the help of the easy chair, let go of it there, threw himself against the door, held himself upright against it—the balls of his tiny limbs had a little sticky stuff on them—and rested there momentarily from his exertion. </span>
      <span id="f250">Then he made an effort to turn the key in the lock with his mouth. </span>
      <span id="f251">Unfortunately it seemed that he had no real teeth. </span>
      <span id="f252">How then was he to grab hold of the key? </span>
      <span id="f253">But to make up for that his jaws were naturally very strong; with their help he managed to get the key really moving. </span>
      <span id="f254">He didn&#39;t notice that he was obviously inflicting some damage on himself, for a brown fluid came out of his mouth, flowed over the key, and dripped onto the floor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f255">&#34;Just listen for a moment,&#34; said the manager in the next room; &#34;he&#39;s turning the key.&#34; For Gregor that was a great encouragement. </span>
      <span id="f256">But they all should&#39;ve called out to him, including his father and mother, &#34;Come on, Gregor,&#34; they should&#39;ve shouted; &#34;keep going, keep working on the lock.&#34; Imagining that all his efforts were being followed with suspense, he bit down frantically on the key with all the force he could muster. </span>
      <span id="f257">As the key turned more, he danced around the lock. </span>
      <span id="f258">Now he was holding himself upright only with his mouth, and he had to hang onto the key or then press it down again with the whole weight of his body, as necessary. </span>
      <span id="f259">The quite distinct click of the lock as it finally snapped really woke Gregor up. </span>
      <span id="f260">Breathing heavily he said to himself, &#34;So I didn&#39;t need the locksmith,&#34; and he set his head against the door handle to open the door completely.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f261">Because he had to open the door in this way, it was already open very wide without him yet being really visible. </span>
      <span id="f262">He first had to turn himself slowly around the edge of the door, very carefully, of course, if he didn&#39;t want to fall awkwardly on his back right at the entrance into the room. </span>
      <span id="f263">He was still preoccupied with this difficult movement and had no time to pay attention to anything else, when he heard the manager exclaim a loud &#34;Oh!&#34;—it sounded like the wind whistling—and now he saw him, nearest to the door, pressing his hand against his open mouth and moving slowly back, as if an invisible constant force was pushing him away. </span>
      <span id="f264">His mother—in spite of the presence of the manager she was standing here with her hair sticking up on end, still a mess from the night—was looking at his father with her hands clasped. </span>
      <span id="f265">She then went two steps towards Gregor and collapsed right in the middle of her skirts, which were spread out all around her, her face sunk on her breast, completely concealed. </span>
      <span id="f266">His father clenched his fist with a hostile expression, as if he wished to push Gregor back into his room, then looked uncertainly around the living room, covered his eyes with his hands, and cried so that his mighty breast shook.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f267">At this point Gregor did not take one step into the room, but leaned his body from the inside against the firmly bolted wing of the door, so that only half his body was visible, as well as his head, tilted sideways, with which he peeped over at the others. </span>
      <span id="f268">Meanwhile it had become much brighter. </span>
      <span id="f269">Standing out clearly from the other side of the street was a part of the endless grey-black house situated opposite—it was a hospital—with its severe regular windows breaking up the facade. </span>
      <span id="f270">The rain was still coming down, but only in large individual drops visibly and firmly thrown down one by one onto the ground. </span>
      <span id="f271">The breakfast dishes were standing piled around on the table, because for his father breakfast was the most important meal time in the day, which he prolonged for hours by reading various newspapers. </span>
      <span id="f272">Directly across on the opposite wall hung a photograph of Gregor from the time of his military service; it was a picture of him as a lieutenant, as he, smiling and worry free, with his hand on his sword, demanded respect for his bearing and uniform. </span>
      <span id="f273">The door to the hall was ajar, and since the door to the apartment was also open, one could see out into the landing of the apartment and the start of the staircase going down.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f274">&#34;Now,&#34; said Gregor, well aware that he was the only one who had kept his composure. </span>
      <span id="f275">&#34;I&#39;ll get dressed right away, pack up the collection of samples, and set off. </span>
      <span id="f276">You&#39;ll allow me to set out on my way, will you not? </span>
      <span id="f277">You see, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f278">Manager, I am not pig-headed, and I am happy to work. </span>
      <span id="f279">Travelling is exhausting, but I couldn&#39;t live without it. </span>
      <span id="f280">Where are you going, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f281">Manager? </span>
      <span id="f282">To the office? </span>
      <span id="f283">Really? </span>
      <span id="f284">Will you report everything truthfully? </span>
      <span id="f285">A person can be incapable of work momentarily, but that&#39;s precisely the best time to remember the earlier achievements and to consider that later, after the obstacles have been shoved aside, the person will work all the more eagerly and intensely. </span>
      <span id="f286">I am really so indebted to Mr. </span>
      <span id="f287">Chief--you know that perfectly well. </span>
      <span id="f288">On the other hand, I am concerned about my parents and my sister. </span>
      <span id="f289">I&#39;m in a fix, but I&#39;ll work myself out of it again. </span>
      <span id="f290">Don&#39;t make things more difficult for me than they already are. </span>
      <span id="f291">Speak up on my behalf in the office! </span>
      <span id="f292">People don&#39;t like travelling salesmen. </span>
      <span id="f293">I know that. </span>
      <span id="f294">People think they earn pots of money and thus lead a fine life. </span>
      <span id="f295">People don&#39;t even have any special reason to think through this judgment more clearly. </span>
      <span id="f296">But you, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f297">Manager, you have a better perspective on what&#39;s involved than other people, even, I tell you in total confidence, a better perspective than Mr. </span>
      <span id="f298">Chairman himself, who in his capacity as the employer may let his judgment make casual mistakes at the expense of an employee. </span>
      <span id="f299">You also know well enough that the travelling salesman who is outside the office almost the entire year can become so easily a victim of gossip, coincidences, and groundless complaints, against which it&#39;s impossible for him to defend himself, since for the most part he doesn&#39;t hear about them at all and only then when he&#39;s exhausted after finishing a trip and at home gets to feel in his own body the nasty consequences, which can&#39;t be thoroughly explored back to their origins. </span>
      <span id="f300">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f301">Manager, don&#39;t leave without speaking a word telling me that you&#39;ll at least concede that I&#39;m a little in the right!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f302">But at Gregor&#39;s first words the manager had already turned away, and now he looked back at Gregor over his twitching shoulders with pursed lips. </span>
      <span id="f303">During Gregor&#39;s speech he was not still for a moment but kept moving away towards the door, without taking his eyes off Gregor, but really gradually, as if there was a secret ban on leaving the room. </span>
      <span id="f304">He was already in the hall, and given the sudden movement with which he finally pulled his foot out of the living room, one could have believed that he had just burned the sole of his foot. </span>
      <span id="f305">In the hall, however, he stretched his right hand out away from his body towards the staircase, as if some truly supernatural relief was waiting for him there.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f306">Gregor realized that he must not under any circumstances allow the manager to go away in this frame of mind, especially if his position in the firm was not to be placed in the greatest danger. </span>
      <span id="f307">His parents did not understand all this very well. </span>
      <span id="f308">Over the long years, they had developed the conviction that Gregor was set up for life in his firm and, in addition, they had so much to do nowadays with their present troubles that all foresight was foreign to them. </span>
      <span id="f309">But Gregor had this foresight. </span>
      <span id="f310">The manager must be held back, calmed down, convinced, and finally won over. </span>
      <span id="f311">The future of Gregor and his family really depended on it! </span>
      <span id="f312">If only the sister had been there! </span>
      <span id="f313">She was clever. </span>
      <span id="f314">She had already cried while Gregor was still lying quietly on his back. </span>
      <span id="f315">And the manager, this friend of the ladies, would certainly let himself be guided by her. </span>
      <span id="f316">She would have closed the door to the apartment and talked him out of his fright in the hall. </span>
      <span id="f317">But the sister was not even there. </span>
      <span id="f318">Gregor must deal with it himself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f319">Without thinking that as yet he didn&#39;t know anything about his present ability to move and that his speech possibly—indeed probably—had once again not been understood, he left the wing of the door, pushed himself through the opening, and wanted to go over to the manager, who was already holding tight onto the handrail with both hands on the landing in a ridiculous way. </span>
      <span id="f320">But as he looked for something to hold onto, with a small scream Gregor immediately fell down onto his numerous little legs. </span>
      <span id="f321">Scarcely had this happened, when he felt for the first time that morning a general physical well being. </span>
      <span id="f322">The small limbs had firm floor under them; they obeyed perfectly, as he noticed to his joy, and strove to carry him forward in the direction he wanted. </span>
      <span id="f323">Right away he believed that the final amelioration of all his suffering was immediately at hand. </span>
      <span id="f324">But at the very moment when he lay on the floor rocking in a restrained manner quite close and directly across from his mother, who had apparently totally sunk into herself, she suddenly sprang right up with her arms spread far apart and her fingers extended and cried out, &#34;Help, for God&#39;s sake, help!&#34; She held her head bowed down, as if she wanted to view Gregor better, but ran senselessly back, contradicting that gesture, forgetting that behind her stood the table with all the dishes on it. </span>
      <span id="f325">When she reached the table, she sat down heavily on it, as if absent-mindedly, and did not appear to notice at all that next to her coffee was pouring out onto the carpet in a full stream from the large overturned container.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f326">&#34;Mother, mother,&#34; said Gregor quietly, and looked over towards her. </span>
      <span id="f327">The manager momentarily had disappeared completely from his mind. </span>
      <span id="f328">At the sight of the flowing coffee Gregor couldn&#39;t stop himself snapping his jaws in the air a few times . </span>
      <span id="f329">At that his mother screamed all over again, hurried from the table, and collapsed into the arms of his father, who was rushing towards her. </span>
      <span id="f330">But Gregor had no time right now for his parents—the manager was already on the staircase. </span>
      <span id="f331">His chin level with the banister, the manager looked back for the last time. </span>
      <span id="f332">Gregor took an initial movement to catch up to him if possible. </span>
      <span id="f333">But the manager must have suspected something, because he made a leap down over a few stairs and disappeared, still shouting &#34;Huh!&#34; The sound echoed throughout the entire stairwell.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f334">Now, unfortunately this flight of the manager also seemed to bewilder his father completely. </span>
      <span id="f335">Earlier he had been relatively calm, for instead of running after the manager himself or at least not hindering Gregor from his pursuit, with his right hand he grabbed hold of the manager&#39;s cane, which he had left behind with his hat and overcoat on a chair. </span>
      <span id="f336">With his left hand, his father picked up a large newspaper from the table and, stamping his feet on the floor, he set out to drive Gregor back into his room by waving the cane and the newspaper. </span>
      <span id="f337">No request of Gregor&#39;s was of any use; no request would even be understood. </span>
      <span id="f338">No matter how willing he was to turn his head respectfully, his father just stomped all the harder with his feet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f339">Across the room from him his mother had pulled open a window, in spite of the cool weather, and leaning out with her hands on her cheeks, she pushed her face far outside the window. </span>
      <span id="f340">Between the alley and the stairwell a strong draught came up, the curtains on the window flew around, the newspapers on the table swished, and individual sheets fluttered down over the floor. </span>
      <span id="f341">The father relentlessly pressed forward, pushing out sibilants, like a wild man. </span>
      <span id="f342">Now, Gregor had no practice at all in going backwards—it was really very slow going. </span>
      <span id="f343">If Gregor only had been allowed to turn himself around, he would have been in his room right away, but he was afraid to make his father impatient by the time-consuming process of turning around, and each moment he faced the threat of a mortal blow on his back or his head from the cane in his father&#39;s hand. </span>
      <span id="f344">Finally Gregor had no other option, for he noticed with horror that he did not understand yet how to maintain his direction going backwards. </span>
      <span id="f345">And so he began, amid constantly anxious sideways glances in his father&#39;s direction, to turn himself around as quickly as possible, although in truth this was only done very slowly. </span>
      <span id="f346">Perhaps his father noticed his good intentions, for he did not disrupt Gregor in this motion, but with the tip of the cane from a distance he even directed Gregor&#39;s rotating movement here and there.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f347">If only his father had not hissed so unbearably! </span>
      <span id="f348">Because of that Gregor totally lost his head. </span>
      <span id="f349">He was already almost totally turned around, when, always with this hissing in his ear, he just made a mistake and turned himself back a little. </span>
      <span id="f350">But when he finally was successful in getting his head in front of the door opening, it became clear that his body was too wide to go through any further. </span>
      <span id="f351">Naturally his father, in his present mental state, had no idea of opening the other wing of the door a bit to create a suitable passage for Gregor to get through. </span>
      <span id="f352">His single fixed thought was that Gregor must get into his room as quickly as possible. </span>
      <span id="f353">He would never have allowed the elaborate preparations that Gregor required to orient himself and thus perhaps get through the door. </span>
      <span id="f354">On the contrary, as if there were no obstacle and with a peculiar noise, he now drove Gregor forwards. </span>
      <span id="f355">Behind Gregor the sound at this point was no longer like the voice of only a single father. </span>
      <span id="f356">Now it was really no longer a joke, and Gregor forced himself, come what might, into the door. </span>
      <span id="f357">One side of his body was lifted up. </span>
      <span id="f358">He lay at an angle in the door opening. </span>
      <span id="f359">His one flank was sore with the scraping. </span>
      <span id="f360">On the white door ugly blotches were left. </span>
      <span id="f361">Soon he was stuck fast and would have not been able to move any more on his own. </span>
      <span id="f362">The tiny legs on one side hung twitching in the air above, and the ones on the other side were pushed painfully into the floor. </span>
      <span id="f363">Then his father gave him one really strong liberating push from behind, and he scurried, bleeding severely, far into the interior of his room. </span>
      <span id="f364">The door was slammed shut with the cane, and finally it was quiet.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>