<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER III.</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f626">CHAPTER III.</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f627">Gregor&#39;s serious wound, from which he suffered for over a month—since no one ventured to remove the apple, it remained in his flesh as a visible reminder—seemed by itself to have reminded the father that, in spite of his present unhappy and hateful appearance, Gregor was a member of the family, something one should not treat as an enemy, and that it was, on the contrary, a requirement of family duty to suppress one&#39;s aversion and to endure--nothing else, just endure. </span>
      <span id="f628">And if through his wound Gregor had now apparently lost for good his ability to move and for the time being needed many, many minutes to crawl across his room, like an aged invalid—so far as creeping up high was concerned, that was unimaginable—nevertheless for this worsening of his condition, in his opinion, he did get completely satisfactory compensation, because every day towards evening the door to the living room, which he was in the habit of keeping a sharp eye on even one or two hours beforehand, was opened, so that he, lying down in the darkness of his room, invisible from the living room, could see the entire family at the illuminated table and listen to their conversation, to a certain extent with their common permission, a situation quite different from what had happened before.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f629">Of course, it was no longer the animated social interaction of former times, which Gregor in small hotel rooms had always thought about with a certain longing, when, tired out, he had had to throw himself into the damp bedclothes. </span>
      <span id="f630">For the most part what went on now was very quiet. </span>
      <span id="f631">After the evening meal, the father fell asleep quickly in his arm chair. </span>
      <span id="f632">The mother and sister talked guardedly to each other in the stillness. </span>
      <span id="f633">Bent far over, the mother sewed fine undergarments for a fashion shop. </span>
      <span id="f634">The sister, who had taken on a job as a salesgirl, in the evening studied stenography and French, so as perhaps later to obtain a better position. </span>
      <span id="f635">Sometimes the father woke up and, as if he was quite ignorant that he had been asleep, said to the mother &#34;How long you have been sewing today?&#34; and went right back to sleep, while the mother and the sister smiled tiredly to each other.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f636">With a sort of stubbornness the father refused to take off his servant&#39;s uniform even at home, and while his sleeping gown hung unused on the coat hook, the father dozed completely dressed in his place, as if he was always ready for his responsibility and even here was waiting for the voice of his superior. </span>
      <span id="f637">As a result, in spite of all the care of the mother and sister, his uniform, which even at the start was not new, grew dirty, and Gregor looked, often for the entire evening, at this clothing, with stains all over it and with its gold buttons always polished, in which the old man, although very uncomfortable, slept peacefully nonetheless.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f638">As soon as the clock struck ten, the mother tried gently encouraging the father to wake up and then persuading him to go to bed, on the ground that he couldn&#39;t get a proper sleep here and that the father, who had to report for service at six o&#39;clock, really needed a good sleep. </span>
      <span id="f639">But in his stubbornness, which had gripped him since he had become a servant, he insisted always on staying even longer by the table, although he regularly fell asleep and then could only be prevailed upon with the greatest difficulty to trade his chair for the bed. </span>
      <span id="f640">No matter how much the mother and sister might at that point work on him with small admonitions, for a quarter of an hour he would remain shaking his head slowly, his eyes closed, without standing up. </span>
      <span id="f641">The mother would pull him by the sleeve and speak flattering words into his ear; the sister would leave her work to help her mother, but that would not have the desired effect on the father. </span>
      <span id="f642">He would settle himself even more deeply in his arm chair. </span>
      <span id="f643">Only when the two women grabbed him under the armpits would he throw his eyes open, look back and forth at the mother and sister, and habitually say &#34;This is a life. </span>
      <span id="f644">This is the peace and quiet of my old age.&#34; And propped up by both women, he would heave himself up elaborately, as if for him it was the greatest trouble, allow himself to be led to the door by the women, wave them away there, and proceed on his own from there, while the mother quickly threw down her sewing implements and the sister her pen in order to run after the father and help him some more.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f645">In this overworked and exhausted family who had time to worry any longer about Gregor more than was absolutely necessary? </span>
      <span id="f646">The household was constantly getting smaller. </span>
      <span id="f647">The servant girl was now let go. </span>
      <span id="f648">A huge bony cleaning woman with white hair flying all over her head came in the morning and evening to do the heaviest work. </span>
      <span id="f649">The mother took care of everything else in addition to her considerable sewing work. </span>
      <span id="f650">It even happened that various pieces of family jewellery, which previously the mother and sister had been overjoyed to wear on social and festive occasions, were sold, as Gregor found out in the evening from the general discussion of the prices they had fetched. </span>
      <span id="f651">But the greatest complaint was always that they could not leave this apartment, which was too big for their present means, since it was impossible to imagine how Gregor might be moved. </span>
      <span id="f652">But Gregor fully recognized that it was not just consideration for him which was preventing a move, for he could have been transported easily in a suitable box with a few air holes. </span>
      <span id="f653">The main thing holding the family back from a change in living quarters was far more their complete hopelessness and the idea that they had been struck by a misfortune like no one else in their entire circle of relatives and acquaintances.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f654">What the world demands of poor people they now carried out to an extreme degree. </span>
      <span id="f655">The father bought breakfast to the petty officials at the bank, the mother sacrificed herself for the undergarments of strangers, the sister behind her desk was at the beck and call of customers, but the family&#39;s energies did not extend any further. </span>
      <span id="f656">And the wound in his back began to pain Gregor all over again, when now mother and sister, after they had escorted the father to bed, came back, let their work lie, moved close together, and sat cheek to cheek and when his mother would now say, pointing to Gregor&#39;s room, &#34;Close the door, Grete,&#34; and when Gregor was again in the darkness, while close by the women mingled their tears or, quite dry eyed, stared at the table.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f657">Gregor spent his nights and days with hardly any sleep. </span>
      <span id="f658">Sometimes he thought that the next time the door opened he would take over the family arrangements just as he had earlier. </span>
      <span id="f659">In his imagination appeared again, after a long time, his employer and supervisor and the apprentices, the excessively spineless custodian, two or three friends from other businesses, a chambermaid from a hotel in the provinces, a loving fleeting memory, a female cashier from a hat shop, whom he had seriously but too slowly courted--they all appeared mixed in with strangers or people he had already forgotten, but instead of helping him and his family, they were all unapproachable, and he was happy to see them disappear.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f660">But then he was in no mood to worry about his family. </span>
      <span id="f661">He was filled with sheer anger over the wretched care he was getting, even though he couldn&#39;t imagine anything which he might have an appetite for. </span>
      <span id="f662">Still, he made plans about how he could take from the larder what he at all account deserved, even if he wasn&#39;t hungry. </span>
      <span id="f663">Without thinking any more about how they might be able to give Gregor special pleasure, the sister now kicked some food or other very quickly into his room in the morning and at noon, before she ran off to her shop, and in the evening, quite indifferent to whether the food had perhaps only been tasted or, what happened most frequently, remained entirely undisturbed, she whisked it out with one sweep of her broom. </span>
      <span id="f664">The task of cleaning his room, which she now always carried out in the evening, could not be done any more quickly. </span>
      <span id="f665">Streaks of dirt ran along the walls; here and there lay tangles of dust and garbage. </span>
      <span id="f666">At first, when his sister arrived, Gregor positioned himself in a particularly filthy corner in order with this posture to make something of a protest. </span>
      <span id="f667">But he could have well stayed there for weeks without his sister&#39;s changing her ways. </span>
      <span id="f668">In fact, she perceived the dirt as much as he did, but she had decided just to let it stay.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f669">In this business, with a touchiness which was quite new to her and which had generally taken over the entire family, she kept watch to see that the cleaning of Gregor&#39;s room remained reserved for her. </span>
      <span id="f670">Once his mother had undertaken a major cleaning of Gregor&#39;s room, which she had only completed successfully after using a few buckets of water. </span>
      <span id="f671">But the extensive dampness made Gregor sick and he lay supine, embittered and immobile on the couch. </span>
      <span id="f672">However, the mother&#39;s punishment was not delayed for long. </span>
      <span id="f673">For in the evening the sister had hardly observed the change in Gregor&#39;s room before she ran into the living room mightily offended and, in spite of her mother&#39;s hand lifted high in entreaty, broke out in a fit of crying. </span>
      <span id="f674">Her parents—the father had, of course, woken up with a start in his arm chair—at first looked at her astonished and helpless, until they started to get agitated. </span>
      <span id="f675">Turning to his right, the father heaped reproaches on the mother that she was not to take over the cleaning of Gregor&#39;s room from the sister and, turning to his left, he shouted at the sister that she would no longer be allowed to clean Gregor&#39;s room ever again, while the mother tried to pull the father, beside himself in his excitement, into the bed room. </span>
      <span id="f676">The sister, shaken by her crying fit, pounded on the table with her tiny fists, and Gregor hissed at all this, angry that no one thought about shutting the door and sparing him the sight of this commotion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f677">But even when the sister, exhausted from her daily work, had grown tired of caring for Gregor as she had before, even then the mother did not have to come at all on her behalf. </span>
      <span id="f678">And Gregor did not have to be neglected. </span>
      <span id="f679">For now the cleaning woman was there. </span>
      <span id="f680">This old widow, who in her long life must have managed to survive the worst with the help of her bony frame, had no real horror of Gregor. </span>
      <span id="f681">Without being in the least curious, she had once by chance opened Gregor&#39;s door. </span>
      <span id="f682">At the sight of Gregor, who, totally surprised, began to scamper here and there, although no one was chasing him, she remained standing with her hands folded across her stomach staring at him. </span>
      <span id="f683">Since then she did not fail to open the door furtively a little every morning and evening to look in on Gregor. </span>
      <span id="f684">At first, she also called him to her with words which she presumably thought were friendly, like &#34;Come here for a bit, old dung beetle!&#34; or &#34;Hey, look at the old dung beetle!&#34; Addressed in such a manner, Gregor answered nothing, but remained motionless in his place, as if the door had not been opened at all. </span>
      <span id="f685">If only, instead of allowing this cleaning woman to disturb him uselessly whenever she felt like it, they had given her orders to clean up his room every day! </span>
      <span id="f686">One day in the early morning—a hard downpour, perhaps already a sign of the coming spring, struck the window panes—when the cleaning woman started up once again with her usual conversation, Gregor was so bitter that he turned towards her, as if for an attack, although slowly and weakly. </span>
      <span id="f687">But instead of being afraid of him, the cleaning woman merely lifted up a chair standing close by the door and, as she stood there with her mouth wide open, her intention was clear: she would close her mouth only when the chair in her hand had been thrown down on Gregor&#39;s back. </span>
      <span id="f688">&#34;This goes no further, all right?&#34; she asked, as Gregor turned himself around again, and she placed the chair calmly back in the corner.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f689">Gregor ate hardly anything any more. </span>
      <span id="f690">Only when he chanced to move past the food which had been prepared did he, as a game, take a bit into his mouth, hold it there for hours, and generally spit it out again. </span>
      <span id="f691">At first he thought it might be his sadness over the condition of his room which kept him from eating, but he very soon became reconciled to the alterations in his room. </span>
      <span id="f692">People had grown accustomed to put into storage in his room things which they couldn&#39;t put anywhere else, and at this point there were many such things, now that they had rented one room of the apartment to three lodgers. </span>
      <span id="f693">These solemn gentlemen—all three had full beards, as Gregor once found out through a crack in the door—were meticulously intent on tidiness, not only in their own room but, since they had now rented a room here, in the entire household, and particularly in the kitchen. </span>
      <span id="f694">They simply did not tolerate any useless or shoddy stuff. </span>
      <span id="f695">Moreover, for the most part they had brought with them their own pieces of furniture. </span>
      <span id="f696">Thus, many items had become superfluous, and these were not really things one could sell or things people wanted to throw out. </span>
      <span id="f697">All these items ended up in Gregor&#39;s room, even the box of ashes and the garbage pail from the kitchen. </span>
      <span id="f698">The cleaning woman, always in a hurry, simply flung anything that was momentarily useless into Gregor&#39;s room. </span>
      <span id="f699">Fortunately Gregor generally saw only the relevant object and the hand which held it. </span>
      <span id="f700">The cleaning woman perhaps was intending, when time and opportunity allowed, to take the stuff out again or to throw everything out all at once, but in fact the things remained lying there, wherever they had ended up at the first throw, unless Gregor squirmed his way through the accumulation of junk and moved it. </span>
      <span id="f701">At first he was forced to do this because otherwise there was no room for him to creep around, but later he did it with a growing pleasure, although after such movements, tired to death and feeling wretched, he didn&#39;t budge for hours.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f702">Because the lodgers sometimes also took their evening meal at home in the common living room, the door to the living room stayed shut on many evenings. </span>
      <span id="f703">But Gregor had no trouble at all going without the open door. </span>
      <span id="f704">Already on many evenings when it was open he had not availed himself of it, but, without the family noticing, was stretched out in the darkest corner of his room. </span>
      <span id="f705">However, once the cleaning woman had left the door to the living room slightly ajar, and it remained open even when the lodgers came in in the evening and the lights were put on. </span>
      <span id="f706">They sat down at the head of the table, where in earlier days the mother, the father, and Gregor had eaten, unfolded their serviettes, and picked up their knives and forks. </span>
      <span id="f707">The mother immediately appeared in the door with a dish of meat and right behind her the sister with a dish piled high with potatoes. </span>
      <span id="f708">The food gave off a lot of steam. </span>
      <span id="f709">The gentlemen lodgers bent over the plate set before them, as if they wanted to check it before eating, and in fact the one who sat in the middle—for the other two he seemed to serve as the authority—cut off a piece of meat still on the plate obviously to establish whether it was sufficiently tender and whether or not something should be shipped back to the kitchen. </span>
      <span id="f710">He was satisfied, and mother and sister, who had looked on in suspense, began to breathe easily and to smile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f711">The family itself ate in the kitchen. </span>
      <span id="f712">In spite of that, before the father went into the kitchen, he came into the room and with a single bow, cap in hand, made a tour of the table. </span>
      <span id="f713">The lodgers rose up collectively and murmured something in their beards. </span>
      <span id="f714">Then, when they were alone, they ate almost in complete silence. </span>
      <span id="f715">It seemed odd to Gregor that, out of all the many different sorts of sounds of eating, what was always audible was their chewing teeth, as if by that Gregor should be shown that people needed their teeth to eat and that nothing could be done even with the most handsome toothless jawbone. </span>
      <span id="f716">&#34;I really do have an appetite,&#34; Gregor said to himself sorrowfully, &#34;but not for these things. </span>
      <span id="f717">How these lodgers stuff themselves, and I am dying.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f718">On this very evening the violin sounded from the kitchen. </span>
      <span id="f719">Gregor didn&#39;t remember hearing it all through this period. </span>
      <span id="f720">The lodgers had already ended their night meal, the middle one had pulled out a newspaper and had given each of the other two a page, and they were now leaning back, reading and smoking. </span>
      <span id="f721">When the violin started playing, they became attentive, got up, and went on tiptoe to the hall door, at which they remained standing pressed up against one another. </span>
      <span id="f722">They must have been audible from the kitchen, because the father called out &#34;Perhaps the gentlemen don&#39;t like the playing? </span>
      <span id="f723">It can be stopped at once.&#34; &#34;On the contrary,&#34; stated the lodger in the middle, &#34;might the young woman not come into us and play in the room here, where it is really much more comfortable and cheerful?&#34; &#34;Oh, thank you,&#34; cried out the father, as if he were the one playing the violin. </span>
      <span id="f724">The men stepped back into the room and waited. </span>
      <span id="f725">Soon the father came with the music stand, the mother with the sheet music, and the sister with the violin. </span>
      <span id="f726">The sister calmly prepared everything for the recital. </span>
      <span id="f727">The parents, who had never previously rented a room and therefore exaggerated their politeness to the lodgers, dared not sit on their own chairs. </span>
      <span id="f728">The father leaned against the door, his right hand stuck between two buttons of his buttoned-up uniform. </span>
      <span id="f729">The mother, however, accepted a chair offered by one lodger. </span>
      <span id="f730">Since she left the chair sit where the gentleman had chanced to put it, she sat to one side in a corner.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f731">The sister began to play. </span>
      <span id="f732">The father and mother, one on each side, followed attentively the movements of her hands. </span>
      <span id="f733">Attracted by the playing, Gregor had ventured to advance a little further forward and his head was already in the living room. </span>
      <span id="f734">He scarcely wondered about the fact that recently he had had so little consideration for the others. </span>
      <span id="f735">Earlier this consideration had been something he was proud of. </span>
      <span id="f736">And for that very reason he would have had at this moment more reason to hide away, because as a result of the dust which lay all over his room and flew around with the slightest movement, he was totally covered in dirt. </span>
      <span id="f737">On his back and his sides he carted around with him dust, threads, hair, and remnants of food. </span>
      <span id="f738">His indifference to everything was much too great for him to lie on his back and scour himself on the carpet, as he often had done earlier during the day. </span>
      <span id="f739">In spite of his condition he had no timidity about inching forward a bit on the spotless floor of the living room.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f740">In any case, no one paid him any attention. </span>
      <span id="f741">The family was all caught up in the violin playing. </span>
      <span id="f742">The lodgers, by contrast, who for the moment had placed themselves, hands in their trouser pockets, behind the music stand much too close to the sister, so that they could all see the sheet music, something that must certainly bother the sister, soon drew back to the window conversing in low voices with bowed heads, where they then remained, worriedly observed by the father. </span>
      <span id="f743">It now seemed really clear that, having assumed they were to hear a beautiful or entertaining violin recital, they were disappointed and were allowing their peace and quiet to be disturbed only out of politeness. </span>
      <span id="f744">The way in which they all blew the smoke from their cigars out of their noses and mouths in particular led one to conclude that they were very irritated. </span>
      <span id="f745">And yet his sister was playing so beautifully. </span>
      <span id="f746">Her face was turned to the side, her gaze followed the score intently and sadly. </span>
      <span id="f747">Gregor crept forward still a little further, keeping his head close against the floor in order to be able to catch her gaze if possible. </span>
      <span id="f748">Was he an animal that music so captivated him? </span>
      <span id="f749">For him it was as if the way to the unknown nourishment he craved was revealing itself. </span>
      <span id="f750">He was determined to press forward right to his sister, to tug at her dress, and to indicate to her in this way that she might still come with her violin into his room, because here no one valued the recital as he wanted to value it. </span>
      <span id="f751">He did not wish to let her go from his room any more, at least not as long as he lived. </span>
      <span id="f752">His frightening appearance would for the first time become useful for him. </span>
      <span id="f753">He wanted to be at all the doors of his room simultaneously and snarl back at the attackers. </span>
      <span id="f754">However, his sister should not be compelled but would remain with him voluntarily. </span>
      <span id="f755">She would sit next to him on the sofa, bend down her ear to him, and he would then confide in her that he firmly intended to send her to the conservatory and that, if his misfortune had not arrived in the interim, he would have declared all this last Christmas—had Christmas really already come and gone?—and would have brooked no argument. </span>
      <span id="f756">After this explanation his sister would break out in tears of emotion, and Gregor would lift himself up to her armpit and kiss her throat, which she, from the time she started going to work, had left exposed without a band or a collar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f757">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f758">Samsa,&#34; called out the middle lodger to the father and, without uttering a further word, pointed his index finger at Gregor as he was moving slowly forward. </span>
      <span id="f759">The violin fell silent. </span>
      <span id="f760">The middle lodger smiled, first shaking his head once at his friends, and then looked down at Gregor once more. </span>
      <span id="f761">Rather than driving Gregor back again, the father seemed to consider it of prime importance to calm down the lodgers, although they were not at all upset and Gregor seemed to entertain them more than the violin recital. </span>
      <span id="f762">The father hurried over to them and with outstretched arms tried to push them into their own room and simultaneously to block their view of Gregor with his own body. </span>
      <span id="f763">At this point they became really somewhat irritated, although one no longer knew whether that was because of the father&#39;s behaviour or because of knowledge they had just acquired that they had, without knowing it, a neighbour like Gregor. </span>
      <span id="f764">They demanded explanations from his father, raised their arms to make their points, tugged agitatedly at their beards, and moved back towards their room quite slowly. </span>
      <span id="f765">In the meantime, the isolation which had suddenly fallen upon his sister after the sudden breaking off of the recital had overwhelmed her. </span>
      <span id="f766">She had held onto the violin and bow in her limp hands for a little while and had continued to look at the sheet music as if she was still playing. </span>
      <span id="f767">All at once she pulled herself together, placed the instrument in her mother&#39;s lap—the mother was still sitting in her chair having trouble breathing for her lungs were labouring—and had run into the next room, which the lodgers, pressured by the father, were already approaching more rapidly. </span>
      <span id="f768">One could observe how under the sister&#39;s practiced hands the sheets and pillows on the beds were thrown on high and arranged. </span>
      <span id="f769">Even before the lodgers had reached the room, she was finished fixing the beds and was slipping out. </span>
      <span id="f770">The father seemed so gripped once again with his stubbornness that he forgot about the respect which he always owed to his renters. </span>
      <span id="f771">He pressed on and on, until at the door of the room the middle gentleman stamped loudly with his foot and thus brought the father to a standstill. </span>
      <span id="f772">&#34;I hereby declare,&#34; the middle lodger said, raising his hand and casting his glance both on the mother and the sister, &#34;that considering the disgraceful conditions prevailing in this apartment and family&#34;—with this he spat decisively on the floor—&#34;I immediately cancel my room. </span>
      <span id="f773">I will, of course, pay nothing at all for the days which I have lived here; on the contrary I shall think about whether or not I will initiate some sort of action against you, something which—believe me—will be very easy to establish.&#34; He fell silent and looked directly in front of him, as if he was waiting for something. </span>
      <span id="f774">In fact, his two friends immediately joined in with their opinions, &#34;We also give immediate notice.&#34; At that he seized the door handle, banged the door shut, and locked it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f775">The father groped his way tottering to his chair and let himself fall in it. </span>
      <span id="f776">It looked as if he was stretching out for his usual evening snooze, but the heavy nodding of his head, which looked as if it was without support, showed that he was not sleeping at all. </span>
      <span id="f777">Gregor had lain motionless the entire time in the spot where the lodgers had caught him. </span>
      <span id="f778">Disappointment with the collapse of his plan and perhaps also weakness brought on by his severe hunger made it impossible for him to move. </span>
      <span id="f779">He was certainly afraid that a general disaster would break over him at any moment, and he waited. </span>
      <span id="f780">He was not even startled when the violin fell from the mother&#39;s lap, out from under her trembling fingers, and gave off a reverberating tone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f781">&#34;My dear parents,&#34; said the sister banging her hand on the table by way of an introduction, &#34;things cannot go on any longer in this way. </span>
      <span id="f782">Maybe if you don&#39;t understand that, well, I do. </span>
      <span id="f783">I will not utter my brother&#39;s name in front of this monster, and thus I say only that we must try to get rid of it. </span>
      <span id="f784">We have tried what is humanly possible to take care of it and to be patient. </span>
      <span id="f785">I believe that no one can criticize us in the slightest.&#34; &#34;She is right in a thousand ways,&#34; said the father to himself. </span>
      <span id="f786">The mother, who was still incapable of breathing properly, began to cough numbly with her hand held up over her mouth and a manic expression in her eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f787">The sister hurried over to her mother and held her forehead. </span>
      <span id="f788">The sister&#39;s words seemed to have led the father to certain reflections. </span>
      <span id="f789">He sat upright, played with his uniform hat among the plates, which still lay on the table from the lodgers&#39; evening meal, and looked now and then at the motionless Gregor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f790">&#34;We must try to get rid of it,&#34; the sister now said decisively to the father, for the mother, in her coughing fit, was not listening to anything. </span>
      <span id="f791">&#34;It is killing you both. </span>
      <span id="f792">I see it coming. </span>
      <span id="f793">When people have to work as hard as we all do, they cannot also tolerate this endless torment at home. </span>
      <span id="f794">I just can&#39;t go on any more.&#34; And she broke out into such a crying fit that her tears flowed out down onto her mother&#39;s face. </span>
      <span id="f795">She wiped them off her mother with mechanical motions of her hands.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f796">&#34;Child,&#34; said the father sympathetically and with obvious appreciation, &#34;then what should we do?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f797">The sister only shrugged her shoulders as a sign of the perplexity which, in contrast to her previous confidence, had come over her while she was crying.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f798">&#34;If only he understood us,&#34; said the father in a semi-questioning tone. </span>
      <span id="f799">The sister, in the midst of her sobbing, shook her hand energetically as a sign that there was no point thinking of that.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f800">&#34;If he only understood us,&#34; repeated the father and by shutting his eyes he absorbed the sister&#39;s conviction of the impossibility of this point, &#34;then perhaps some compromise would be possible with him. </span>
      <span id="f801">But as it is. </span>
      <span id="f802">. </span>
      <span id="f803">.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f804">&#34;It must be gotten rid of,&#34; cried the sister. </span>
      <span id="f805">&#34;That is the only way, father. </span>
      <span id="f806">You must try to get rid of the idea that this is Gregor. </span>
      <span id="f807">The fact that we have believed for so long, that is truly our real misfortune. </span>
      <span id="f808">But how can it be Gregor? </span>
      <span id="f809">If it were Gregor, he would have long ago realized that a communal life among human beings is not possible with such an animal and would have gone away voluntarily. </span>
      <span id="f810">Then we would not have a brother, but we could go on living and honour his memory. </span>
      <span id="f811">But this animal plagues us. </span>
      <span id="f812">It drives away the lodgers, will obviously take over the entire apartment, and leave us to spend the night in the alley. </span>
      <span id="f813">Just look, father,&#34; she suddenly cried out, &#34;he&#39;s already starting up again.&#34; With a fright which was totally incomprehensible to Gregor, the sister even left the mother, pushed herself away from her chair, as if she would sooner sacrifice her mother than remain in Gregor&#39;s vicinity, and rushed behind her father who, excited merely by her behaviour, also stood up and half raised his arms in front of the sister as though to protect her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f814">But Gregor did not have any notion of wishing to create problems for anyone and certainly not for his sister. </span>
      <span id="f815">He had just started to turn himself around in order to creep back into his room, quite a startling sight, since, as a result of his suffering condition, he had to guide himself through the difficulty of turning around with his head, in this process lifting and banging it against the floor several times. </span>
      <span id="f816">He paused and looked around. </span>
      <span id="f817">His good intentions seem to have been recognized. </span>
      <span id="f818">The fright had lasted only for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f819">Now they looked at him in silence and sorrow. </span>
      <span id="f820">His mother lay in her chair, with her legs stretched out and pressed together; her eyes were almost shut from weariness. </span>
      <span id="f821">The father and sister sat next to one another. </span>
      <span id="f822">The sister had set her hands around the father&#39;s neck.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f823">&#34;Now perhaps I can actually turn myself around,&#34; thought Gregor and began the task again. </span>
      <span id="f824">He couldn&#39;t stop puffing at the effort and had to rest now and then.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f825">Besides, no one was urging him on. </span>
      <span id="f826">It was all left to him on his own. </span>
      <span id="f827">When he had completed turning around, he immediately began to wander straight back. </span>
      <span id="f828">He was astonished at the great distance which separated him from his room and did not understand in the least how in his weakness he had covered the same distance a short time before, almost without noticing it. </span>
      <span id="f829">Constantly intent only on creeping along quickly, he hardly paid any attention to the fact that no word or cry from his family interrupted him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f830">Only when he was already in the door did he turn his head, not completely, because he felt his neck growing stiff. </span>
      <span id="f831">At any rate he still saw that behind him nothing had changed. </span>
      <span id="f832">Only the sister was standing up. </span>
      <span id="f833">His last glimpse brushed over the mother who was now completely asleep. </span>
      <span id="f834">Hardly was he inside his room when the door was pushed shut very quickly, bolted fast, and barred. </span>
      <span id="f835">Gregor was startled by the sudden commotion behind him, so much so that his little limbs bent double under him. </span>
      <span id="f836">It was his sister who had been in such a hurry. </span>
      <span id="f837">She had stood up right away, had waited, and had then sprung forward nimbly. </span>
      <span id="f838">Gregor had not heard anything of her approach. </span>
      <span id="f839">She cried out &#34;Finally!&#34; to her parents, as she turned the key in the lock.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f840">&#34;What now?&#34; Gregor asked himself and looked around him in the darkness. </span>
      <span id="f841">He soon made the discovery that he could no longer move at all. </span>
      <span id="f842">He was not surprised at that. </span>
      <span id="f843">On the contrary, it struck him as unnatural that up to this point he had really been able up to move around with these thin little legs. </span>
      <span id="f844">Besides he felt relatively content. </span>
      <span id="f845">True, he had pains throughout his entire body, but it seemed to him that they were gradually becoming weaker and weaker and would finally go away completely. </span>
      <span id="f846">The rotten apple in his back and the inflamed surrounding area, entirely covered with white dust, he hardly noticed. </span>
      <span id="f847">He remembered his family with deep feelings of love. </span>
      <span id="f848">In this business, his own thought that he had to disappear was, if possible, even more decisive than his sister&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f849">He remained in this state of empty and peaceful reflection until the tower clock struck three o&#39;clock in the morning. </span>
      <span id="f850">From the window he witnessed the beginning of the general dawning outside. </span>
      <span id="f851">Then without willing it, his head sank all the way down, and from his nostrils flowed out weakly his last breath.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f852">Early in the morning the cleaning woman came. </span>
      <span id="f853">In her sheer energy and haste she banged all the doors—in precisely the way people had already asked her to avoid—so much so that once she arrived a quiet sleep was no longer possible anywhere in the entire apartment. </span>
      <span id="f854">In her customarily brief visit to Gregor she at first found nothing special. </span>
      <span id="f855">She thought he lay so immobile there because he wanted to play the offended party. </span>
      <span id="f856">She gave him credit for as complete an understanding as possible. </span>
      <span id="f857">Since she happened to be holding the long broom in her hand, she tried to tickle Gregor with it from the door. </span>
      <span id="f858">When that was quite unsuccessful, she became irritated and poked Gregor a little, and only when she had shoved him from his place without any resistance did she become attentive. </span>
      <span id="f859">When she quickly realized the true state of affairs, her eyes grew large, she whistled to herself. </span>
      <span id="f860">However, she didn&#39;t restrain herself for long. </span>
      <span id="f861">She pulled open the door of the bedroom and yelled in a loud voice into the darkness, &#34;Come and look. </span>
      <span id="f862">It&#39;s kicked the bucket. </span>
      <span id="f863">It&#39;s lying there, totally snuffed!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f864">The Samsa married couple sat upright in their marriage bed and had to get over their fright at the cleaning woman before they managed to grasp her message. </span>
      <span id="f865">But then Mr. </span>
      <span id="f866">and Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f867">Samsa climbed very quickly out of bed, one on either side. </span>
      <span id="f868">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f869">Samsa threw the bedspread over his shoulders, Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f870">Samsa came out only in her night-shirt, and like this they stepped into Gregor&#39;s room. </span>
      <span id="f871">Meanwhile, the door of the living room, in which Grete had slept since the lodgers had arrived on the scene, had also opened. </span>
      <span id="f872">She was fully clothed, as if she had not slept at all; her white face also seem to indicate that. </span>
      <span id="f873">&#34;Dead?&#34; said Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f874">Samsa and looked questioningly at the cleaning woman, although she could check everything on her own and even understand without a check. </span>
      <span id="f875">&#34;I should say so,&#34; said the cleaning woman and, by way of proof, poked Gregor&#39;s body with the broom a considerable distance more to the side. </span>
      <span id="f876">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f877">Samsa made a movement as if she wished to restrain the broom, but didn&#39;t do it. </span>
      <span id="f878">&#34;Well,&#34; said Mr. </span>
      <span id="f879">Samsa, &#34;now we can give thanks to God.&#34; He crossed himself, and the three women followed his example.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f880">Grete, who did not take her eyes off the corpse, said, &#34;Look how thin he was. </span>
      <span id="f881">He had eaten nothing for such a long time. </span>
      <span id="f882">The meals which came in here came out again exactly the same.&#34; In fact, Gregor&#39;s body was completely flat and dry. </span>
      <span id="f883">That was apparent really for the first time, now that he was no longer raised on his small limbs and nothing else distracted one&#39;s gaze.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f884">&#34;Grete, come into us for a moment,&#34; said Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f885">Samsa with a melancholy smile, and Grete went, not without looking back at the corpse, behind her parents into the bed room. </span>
      <span id="f886">The cleaning woman shut the door and opened the window wide. </span>
      <span id="f887">In spite of the early morning, the fresh air was partly tinged with warmth. </span>
      <span id="f888">It was already the end of March.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f889">The three lodgers stepped out of their room and looked around for their breakfast, astonished that they had been forgotten. </span>
      <span id="f890">&#34;Where is the breakfast?&#34; asked the middle one of the gentlemen grumpily to the cleaning woman. </span>
      <span id="f891">However, she laid her finger to her lips and then quickly and silently indicated to the lodgers that they could come into Gregor&#39;s room. </span>
      <span id="f892">So they came and stood in the room, which was already quite bright, around Gregor&#39;s corpse, their hands in the pockets of their somewhat worn jackets.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f893">Then the door of the bed room opened, and Mr. </span>
      <span id="f894">Samsa appeared in his uniform, with his wife on one arm and his daughter on the other. </span>
      <span id="f895">All were a little tear stained. </span>
      <span id="f896">Now and then Grete pressed her face onto her father&#39;s arm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f897">&#34;Get out of my apartment immediately,&#34; said Mr. </span>
      <span id="f898">Samsa and pulled open the door, without letting go of the women. </span>
      <span id="f899">&#34;What do you mean?&#34; said the middle lodger, somewhat dismayed and with a sugary smile. </span>
      <span id="f900">The two others kept their hands behind them and constantly rubbed them against each other, as if in joyful anticipation of a great squabble which must end up in their favour. </span>
      <span id="f901">&#34;I mean exactly what I say,&#34; replied Mr. </span>
      <span id="f902">Samsa and went directly with his two female companions up to the lodger. </span>
      <span id="f903">The latter at first stood there motionless and looked at the floor, as if matters were arranging themselves in a new way in his head. </span>
      <span id="f904">&#34;All right, then we&#39;ll go,&#34; he said and looked up at Mr. </span>
      <span id="f905">Samsa as if, suddenly overcome by humility, he was asking fresh permission for this decision. </span>
      <span id="f906">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f907">Samsa merely nodded to him repeatedly with his eyes open wide.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f908">Following that, the lodger actually went with long strides immediately out into the hall. </span>
      <span id="f909">His two friends had already been listening for a while with their hands quite still, and now they hopped smartly after him, as if afraid that Mr. </span>
      <span id="f910">Samsa could step into the hall ahead of them and disturb their reunion with their leader. </span>
      <span id="f911">In the hall all three of them took their hats from the coat rack, pulled their canes from the cane holder, bowed silently, and left the apartment. </span>
      <span id="f912">In what turned out to be an entirely groundless mistrust, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f913">Samsa stepped with the two women out onto the landing, leaned against the railing, and looked over as the three lodgers slowly but steadily made their way down the long staircase, disappeared on each floor in a certain turn of the stairwell, and in a few seconds came out again. </span>
      <span id="f914">The deeper they proceeded, the more the Samsa family lost interest in them, and when a butcher with a tray on his head come to meet them and then with a proud bearing ascended the stairs high above them, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f915">Samsa., together with the women, left the banister, and they all returned, as if relieved, back into their apartment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f916">They decided to pass that day resting and going for a stroll. </span>
      <span id="f917">Not only had they earned this break from work, but there was no question that they really needed it. </span>
      <span id="f918">And so they sat down at the table and wrote three letters of apology: Mr. </span>
      <span id="f919">Samsa to his supervisor, Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f920">Samsa to her client, and Grete to her proprietor. </span>
      <span id="f921">During the writing the cleaning woman came in to say that she was going off, for her morning work was finished. </span>
      <span id="f922">The three people writing at first merely nodded, without glancing up. </span>
      <span id="f923">Only when the cleaning woman was still unwilling to depart, did they look up angrily. </span>
      <span id="f924">&#34;Well?&#34; asked Mr. </span>
      <span id="f925">Samsa. </span>
      <span id="f926">The cleaning woman stood smiling in the doorway, as if she had a great stroke of luck to report to the family but would only do it if she was asked directly. </span>
      <span id="f927">The almost upright small ostrich feather in her hat, which had irritated Mr. </span>
      <span id="f928">Samsa during her entire service, swayed lightly in all directions. </span>
      <span id="f929">&#34;All right then, what do you really want?&#34; asked Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f930">Samsa, whom the cleaning lady still usually respected. </span>
      <span id="f931">&#34;Well,&#34; answered the cleaning woman, smiling so happily she couldn&#39;t go on speaking right away, &#34;about how that rubbish from the next room should be thrown out, you mustn&#39;t worry about it. </span>
      <span id="f932">It&#39;s all taken care of.&#34; Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f933">Samsa and Grete bent down to their letters, as though they wanted to go on writing. </span>
      <span id="f934">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f935">Samsa, who noticed that the cleaning woman wanted to start describing everything in detail, decisively prevented her with an outstretched hand. </span>
      <span id="f936">But since she was not allowed to explain, she remembered the great hurry she was in, and called out, clearly insulted, &#34;Bye bye, everyone,&#34; turned around furiously and left the apartment with a fearful slamming of the door.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f937">&#34;This evening she&#39;ll be let go,&#34; said Mr. </span>
      <span id="f938">Samsa, but he got no answer from either his wife or from his daughter, because the cleaning woman seemed to have upset once again the tranquillity they had just attained. </span>
      <span id="f939">They got up, went to the window, and remained there, with their arms about each other. </span>
      <span id="f940">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f941">Samsa turned around in his chair in their direction and observed them quietly for a while. </span>
      <span id="f942">Then he called out, &#34;All right, come here then. </span>
      <span id="f943">Let&#39;s finally get rid of old things. </span>
      <span id="f944">And have a little consideration for me.&#34; The women attended to him at once. </span>
      <span id="f945">They rushed to him, caressed him, and quickly ended their letters.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f946">Then all three left the apartment together, something they had not done for months now, and took the electric tram into the open air outside the city. </span>
      <span id="f947">The car in which they were sitting by themselves was totally engulfed by the warm sun. </span>
      <span id="f948">Leaning back comfortably in their seats, they talked to each other about future prospects, and they discovered that on closer observation these were not at all bad, for the three of them had employment, about which they had not really questioned each other at all, which was extremely favourable and with especially promising prospects. </span>
      <span id="f949">The greatest improvement in their situation at this moment, of course, had to come from a change of dwelling. </span>
      <span id="f950">Now they wanted to rent an apartment smaller and cheaper but better situated and generally more practical than the present one, which Gregor had found. </span>
      <span id="f951">While they amused themselves in this way, it struck Mr. </span>
      <span id="f952">and Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f953">Samsa, almost at the same moment, how their daughter, who was getting more animated all the time, had blossomed recently, in spite of all the troubles which had made her cheeks pale, into a beautiful and voluptuous young woman. </span>
      <span id="f954">Growing more silent and almost unconsciously understanding each other in their glances, they thought that the time was now at hand to seek out a good honest man for her. </span>
      <span id="f955">And it was something of a confirmation of their new dreams and good intentions when at the end of their journey their daughter got up first and stretched her young body.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>