<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER ONE</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0003">CHAPTER ONE</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0004">THE SEA--LONGINGS FOR SHORE--A LAND-SICK SHIP--DESTINATION OF THE VOYAGERS--THE MARQUESAS--ADVENTURE OF A MISSIONARY’S WIFE AMONG THE SAVAGES--CHARACTERISTIC ANECDOTE OF THE QUEEN OF NUKUHEVA</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0005">Six months at sea! </span>
      <span id="f0006">Yes, reader, as I live, six months out of sight of land; cruising after the sperm-whale beneath the scorching sun of the Line, and tossed on the billows of the wide-rolling Pacific--the sky above, the sea around, and nothing else! </span>
      <span id="f0007">Weeks and weeks ago our fresh provisions were all exhausted. </span>
      <span id="f0008">There is not a sweet potato left; not a single yam. </span>
      <span id="f0009">Those glorious bunches of bananas, which once decorated our stern and quarter-deck, have, alas, disappeared! </span>
      <span id="f0010">and the delicious oranges which hung suspended from our tops and stays--they, too, are gone! </span>
      <span id="f0011">Yes, they are all departed, and there is nothing left us but salt-horse and sea-biscuit. </span>
      <span id="f0012">Oh! </span>
      <span id="f0013">ye state-room sailors, who make so much ado about a fourteen-days’ passage across the Atlantic; who so pathetically relate the privations and hardships of the sea, where, after a day of breakfasting, lunching, dining off five courses, chatting, playing whist, and drinking champagne-punch, it was your hard lot to be shut up in little cabinets of mahogany and maple, and sleep for ten hours, with nothing to disturb you but ‘those good-for-nothing tars, shouting and tramping overhead’,--what would ye say to our six months out of sight of land?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0014">Oh! </span>
      <span id="f0015">for a refreshing glimpse of one blade of grass--for a snuff at the fragrance of a handful of the loamy earth! </span>
      <span id="f0016">Is there nothing fresh around us? </span>
      <span id="f0017">Is there no green thing to be seen? </span>
      <span id="f0018">Yes, the inside of our bulwarks is painted green; but what a vile and sickly hue it is, as if nothing bearing even the semblance of verdure could flourish this weary way from land. </span>
      <span id="f0019">Even the bark that once clung to the wood we use for fuel has been gnawed off and devoured by the captain’s pig; and so long ago, too, that the pig himself has in turn been devoured.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0020">There is but one solitary tenant in the chicken-coop, once a gay and dapper young cock, bearing him so bravely among the coy hens.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0021">But look at him now; there he stands, moping all the day long on that everlasting one leg of his. </span>
      <span id="f0022">He turns with disgust from the mouldy corn before him, and the brackish water in his little trough. </span>
      <span id="f0023">He mourns no doubt his lost companions, literally snatched from him one by one, and never seen again. </span>
      <span id="f0024">But his days of mourning will be few for Mungo, our black cook, told me yesterday that the word had at last gone forth, and poor Pedro’s fate was sealed. </span>
      <span id="f0025">His attenuated body will be laid out upon the captain’s table next Sunday, and long before night will be buried with all the usual ceremonies beneath that worthy individual’s vest. </span>
      <span id="f0026">Who would believe that there could be any one so cruel as to long for the decapitation of the luckless Pedro; yet the sailors pray every minute, selfish fellows, that the miserable fowl may be brought to his end. </span>
      <span id="f0027">They say the captain will never point the ship for the land so long as he has in anticipation a mess of fresh meat. </span>
      <span id="f0028">This unhappy bird can alone furnish it; and when he is once devoured, the captain will come to his senses. </span>
      <span id="f0029">I wish thee no harm, Pedro; but as thou art doomed, sooner or later, to meet the fate of all thy race; and if putting a period to thy existence is to be the signal for our deliverance, why--truth to speak--I wish thy throat cut this very moment; for, oh! </span>
      <span id="f0030">how I wish to see the living earth again! </span>
      <span id="f0031">The old ship herself longs to look out upon the land from her hawse-holes once more, and Jack Lewis said right the other day when the captain found fault with his steering.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0032">‘Why d’ye see, Captain Vangs,’ says bold Jack, ‘I’m as good a helmsman as ever put hand to spoke; but none of us can steer the old lady now. </span>
      <span id="f0033">We can’t keep her full and bye, sir; watch her ever so close, she will fall off and then, sir, when I put the helm down so gently, and try like to coax her to the work, she won’t take it kindly, but will fall round off again; and it’s all because she knows the land is under the lee, sir, and she won’t go any more to windward.’ Aye, and why should she, Jack? </span>
      <span id="f0034">didn’t every one of her stout timbers grow on shore, and hasn’t she sensibilities; as well as we?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0035">Poor old ship! </span>
      <span id="f0036">Her very looks denote her desires! </span>
      <span id="f0037">how deplorably she appears! </span>
      <span id="f0038">The paint on her sides, burnt up by the scorching sun, is puffed out and cracked. </span>
      <span id="f0039">See the weeds she trails along with her, and what an unsightly bunch of those horrid barnacles has formed about her stern-piece; and every time she rises on a sea, she shows her copper torn away, or hanging in jagged strips.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0040">Poor old ship! </span>
      <span id="f0041">I say again: for six months she has been rolling and pitching about, never for one moment at rest. </span>
      <span id="f0042">But courage, old lass, I hope to see thee soon within a biscuit’s toss of the merry land, riding snugly at anchor in some green cove, and sheltered from the boisterous winds.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0043">. </span>
      <span id="f0044">. </span>
      <span id="f0045">. </span>
      <span id="f0046">. </span>
      <span id="f0047">. </span>
      <span id="f0048">.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0049">‘Hurra, my lads! </span>
      <span id="f0050">It’s a settled thing; next week we shape our course to the Marquesas!’ The Marquesas! </span>
      <span id="f0051">What strange visions of outlandish things does the very name spirit up! </span>
      <span id="f0052">Naked houris--cannibal banquets--groves of cocoanut--coral reefs--tattooed chiefs--and bamboo temples; sunny valleys planted with bread-fruit-trees--carved canoes dancing on the flashing blue waters--savage woodlands guarded by horrible idols--HEATHENISH RITES AND HUMAN SACRIFICES.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0053">Such were the strangely jumbled anticipations that haunted me during our passage from the cruising ground. </span>
      <span id="f0054">I felt an irresistible curiosity to see those islands which the olden voyagers had so glowingly described.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0055">The group for which we were now steering (although among the earliest of European discoveries in the South Seas, having been first visited in the year 1595) still continues to be tenanted by beings as strange and barbarous as ever. </span>
      <span id="f0056">The missionaries sent on a heavenly errand, had sailed by their lovely shores, and had abandoned them to their idols of wood and stone. </span>
      <span id="f0057">How interesting the circumstances under which they were discovered! </span>
      <span id="f0058">In the watery path of Mendanna, cruising in quest of some region of gold, these isles had sprung up like a scene of enchantment, and for a moment the Spaniard believed his bright dream was realized.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0059">In honour of the Marquess de Mendoza, then viceroy of Peru--under whose auspices the navigator sailed--he bestowed upon them the name which denoted the rank of his patron, and gave to the world on his return a vague and magnificent account of their beauty. </span>
      <span id="f0060">But these islands, undisturbed for years, relapsed into their previous obscurity; and it is only recently that anything has been known concerning them. </span>
      <span id="f0061">Once in the course of a half century, to be sure, some adventurous rover would break in upon their peaceful repose, and astonished at the unusual scene, would be almost tempted to claim the merit of a new discovery.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0062">Of this interesting group, but little account has ever been given, if we except the slight mention made of them in the sketches of South-Sea voyages. </span>
      <span id="f0063">Cook, in his repeated circumnavigations of the globe, barely touched at their shores; and all that we know about them is from a few general narratives.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0064">Among these, there are two that claim particular notice. </span>
      <span id="f0065">Porter’s ‘Journal of the Cruise of the U.S. </span>
      <span id="f0066">frigate Essex, in the Pacific, during the late War’, is said to contain some interesting particulars concerning the islanders. </span>
      <span id="f0067">This is a work, however, which I have never happened to meet with; and Stewart, the chaplain of the American sloop of war Vincennes, has likewise devoted a portion of his book, entitled ‘A Visit to the South Seas’, to the same subject.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0068">Within the last few, years American and English vessels engaged in the extensive whale fisheries of the Pacific have occasionally, when short of provisions, put into the commodious harbour which there is in one of the islands; but a fear of the natives, founded on the recollection of the dreadful fate which many white men have received at their hands, has deterred their crews from intermixing with the population sufficiently to gain any insight into their peculiar customs and manners.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0069">The Protestant Missions appear to have despaired of reclaiming these islands from heathenism. </span>
      <span id="f0070">The usage they have in every case received from the natives has been such as to intimidate the boldest of their number. </span>
      <span id="f0071">Ellis, in his ‘Polynesian Researches’, gives some interesting accounts of the abortive attempts made by the ‘’Tahiti Mission’’ to establish a branch Mission upon certain islands of the group. </span>
      <span id="f0072">A short time before my visit to the Marquesas, a somewhat amusing incident took place in connection with these efforts, which I cannot avoid relating.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0073">An intrepid missionary, undaunted by the ill-success that had attended all previous endeavours to conciliate the savages, and believing much in the efficacy of female influence, introduced among them his young and beautiful wife, the first white woman who had ever visited their shores. </span>
      <span id="f0074">The islanders at first gazed in mute admiration at so unusual a prodigy, and seemed inclined to regard it as some new divinity. </span>
      <span id="f0075">But after a short time, becoming familiar with its charming aspect, and jealous of the folds which encircled its form, they sought to pierce the sacred veil of calico in which it was enshrined, and in the gratification of their curiosity so far overstepped the limits of good breeding, as deeply to offend the lady’s sense of decorum. </span>
      <span id="f0076">Her sex once ascertained, their idolatry was changed into contempt and there was no end to the contumely showered upon her by the savages, who were exasperated at the deception which they conceived had been practised upon them. </span>
      <span id="f0077">To the horror of her affectionate spouse, she was stripped of her garments, and given to understand that she could no longer carry on her deceits with impunity. </span>
      <span id="f0078">The gentle dame was not sufficiently evangelical to endure this, and, fearful of further improprieties, she forced her husband to relinquish his undertaking, and together they returned to Tahiti.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0079">Not thus shy of exhibiting her charms was the Island Queen herself, the beauteous wife of Movianna, the king of Nukuheva. </span>
      <span id="f0080">Between two and three years after the adventures recorded in this volume, I chanced, while aboard of a man-of-war to touch at these islands. </span>
      <span id="f0081">The French had then held possession of the Marquesas some time, and already prided themselves upon the beneficial effects of their jurisdiction, as discernible in the deportment of the natives. </span>
      <span id="f0082">To be sure, in one of their efforts at reform they had slaughtered about a hundred and fifty of them at Whitihoo--but let that pass. </span>
      <span id="f0083">At the time I mention, the French squadron was rendezvousing in the bay of Nukuheva, and during an interview between one of their captains and our worthy Commodore, it was suggested by the former, that we, as the flag-ship of the American squadron, should receive, in state, a visit from the royal pair. </span>
      <span id="f0084">The French officer likewise represented, with evident satisfaction, that under their tuition the king and queen had imbibed proper notions of their elevated station, and on all ceremonious occasions conducted themselves with suitable dignity. </span>
      <span id="f0085">Accordingly, preparations were made to give their majesties a reception on board in a style corresponding with their rank.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0086">One bright afternoon, a gig, gaily bedizened with streamers, was observed to shove off from the side of one of the French frigates, and pull directly for our gangway. </span>
      <span id="f0087">In the stern sheets reclined Mowanna and his consort. </span>
      <span id="f0088">As they approached, we paid them all the honours due to royalty;--manning our yards, firing a salute, and making a prodigious hubbub.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0089">They ascended the accommodation ladder, were greeted by the Commodore, hat in hand, and passing along the quarter-deck, the marine guard presented arms, while the band struck up ‘The King of the Cannibal Islands’. </span>
      <span id="f0090">So far all went well. </span>
      <span id="f0091">The French officers grimaced and smiled in exceedingly high spirits, wonderfully pleased with the discreet manner in which these distinguished personages behaved themselves.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0092">Their appearance was certainly calculated to produce an effect. </span>
      <span id="f0093">His majesty was arrayed in a magnificent military uniform, stiff with gold lace and embroidery, while his shaven crown was concealed by a huge chapeau bras, waving with ostrich plumes. </span>
      <span id="f0094">There was one slight blemish, however, in his appearance. </span>
      <span id="f0095">A broad patch of tattooing stretched completely across his face, in a line with his eyes, making him look as if he wore a huge pair of goggles; and royalty in goggles suggested some ludicrous ideas. </span>
      <span id="f0096">But it was in the adornment of the fair person of his dark-complexioned spouse that the tailors of the fleet had evinced the gaiety of their national taste. </span>
      <span id="f0097">She was habited in a gaudy tissue of scarlet cloth, trimmed with yellow silk, which, descending a little below the knees, exposed to view her bare legs, embellished with spiral tattooing, and somewhat resembling two miniature Trajan’s columns. </span>
      <span id="f0098">Upon her head was a fanciful turban of purple velvet, figured with silver sprigs, and surmounted by a tuft of variegated feathers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0099">The ship’s company, crowding into the gangway to view the sight, soon arrested her majesty’s attention. </span>
      <span id="f0100">She singled out from their number an old salt, whose bare arms and feet, and exposed breast, were covered with as many inscriptions in India ink as the lid of an Egyptian sarcophagus. </span>
      <span id="f0101">Notwithstanding all the sly hints and remonstrances of the French officers, she immediately approached the man, and pulling further open the bosom of his duck frock, and rolling up the leg of his wide trousers, she gazed with admiration at the bright blue and vermilion pricking thus disclosed to view. </span>
      <span id="f0102">She hung over the fellow, caressing him, and expressing her delight in a variety of wild exclamations and gestures. </span>
      <span id="f0103">The embarrassment of the polite Gauls at such an unlooked-for occurrence may be easily imagined, but picture their consternation, when all at once the royal lady, eager to display the hieroglyphics on her own sweet form, bent forward for a moment, and turning sharply round, threw up the skirt of her mantle and revealed a sight from which the aghast Frenchmen retreated precipitately, and tumbling into their boats, fled the scene of so shocking a catastrophe.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>