<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER TWO</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0104">CHAPTER TWO</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0105">PASSAGE FROM THE CRUISING GROUND TO THE MARQUESAS--SLEEPY TIMES ABOARD SHIP--SOUTH SEA SCENERY--LAND HO--THE FRENCH SQUADRON DISCOVERED AT ANCHOR IN THE BAY OF NUKUHEVA--STRANGE PILOT--ESCORT OF CANOES--A FLOTILLA OF COCOANUTS--SWIMMING VISITORS--THE DOLLY BOARDED BY THEM--STATE OF AFFAIRS THAT ENSUE</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0106">I CAN never forget the eighteen or twenty days during which the light trade-winds were silently sweeping us towards the islands. </span>
      <span id="f0107">In pursuit of the sperm whale, we had been cruising on the line some twenty degrees to the westward of the Gallipagos; and all that we had to do, when our course was determined on, was to square in the yards and keep the vessel before the breeze, and then the good ship and the steady gale did the rest between them. </span>
      <span id="f0108">The man at the wheel never vexed the old lady with any superfluous steering, but comfortably adjusting his limbs at the tiller, would doze away by the hour. </span>
      <span id="f0109">True to her work, the Dolly headed to her course, and like one of those characters who always do best when let alone, she jogged on her way like a veteran old sea-pacer as she was.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0110">What a delightful, lazy, languid time we had whilst we were thus gliding along! </span>
      <span id="f0111">There was nothing to be done; a circumstance that happily suited our disinclination to do anything. </span>
      <span id="f0112">We abandoned the fore-peak altogether, and spreading an awning over the forecastle, slept, ate, and lounged under it the live-long day. </span>
      <span id="f0113">Every one seemed to be under the influence of some narcotic. </span>
      <span id="f0114">Even the officers aft, whose duty required them never to be seated while keeping a deck watch, vainly endeavoured to keep on their pins; and were obliged invariably to compromise the matter by leaning up against the bulwarks, and gazing abstractedly over the side. </span>
      <span id="f0115">Reading was out of the question; take a book in your hand, and you were asleep in an instant.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0116">Although I could not avoid yielding in a great measure to the general languor, still at times I contrived to shake off the spell, and to appreciate the beauty of the scene around me. </span>
      <span id="f0117">The sky presented a clear expanse of the most delicate blue, except along the skirts of the horizon, where you might see a thin drapery of pale clouds which never varied their form or colour. </span>
      <span id="f0118">The long, measured, dirge-like well of the Pacific came rolling along, with its surface broken by little tiny waves, sparkling in the sunshine. </span>
      <span id="f0119">Every now and then a shoal of flying fish, scared from the water under the bows, would leap into the air, and fall the next moment like a shower of silver into the sea. </span>
      <span id="f0120">Then you would see the superb albicore, with his glittering sides, sailing aloft, and often describing an arc in his descent, disappear on the surface of the water. </span>
      <span id="f0121">Far off, the lofty jet of the whale might be seen, and nearer at hand the prowling shark, that villainous footpad of the seas, would come skulking along, and, at a wary distance, regard us with his evil eye. </span>
      <span id="f0122">At times, some shapeless monster of the deep, floating on the surface, would, as we approached, sink slowly into the blue waters, and fade away from the sight. </span>
      <span id="f0123">But the most impressive feature of the scene was the almost unbroken silence that reigned over sky and water. </span>
      <span id="f0124">Scarcely a sound could be heard but the occasional breathing of the grampus, and the rippling at the cut-water.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0125">As we drew nearer the land, I hailed with delight the appearance of innumerable sea-fowl. </span>
      <span id="f0126">Screaming and whirling in spiral tracks, they would accompany the vessel, and at times alight on our yards and stays. </span>
      <span id="f0127">That piratical-looking fellow, appropriately named the man-of-war’s-hawk, with his blood-red bill and raven plumage, would come sweeping round us in gradually diminishing circles, till you could distinctly mark the strange flashings of his eye; and then, as if satisfied with his observation, would sail up into the air and disappear from the view. </span>
      <span id="f0128">Soon, other evidences of our vicinity to the land were apparent, and it was not long before the glad announcement of its being in sight was heard from aloft,--given with that peculiar prolongation of sound that a sailor loves--‘Land ho!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0129">The captain, darting on deck from the cabin, bawled lustily for his spy-glass; the mate in still louder accents hailed the masthead with a tremendous ‘where-away?’ The black cook thrust his woolly head from the galley, and Boatswain, the dog, leaped up between the knight-heads, and barked most furiously. </span>
      <span id="f0130">Land ho! </span>
      <span id="f0131">Aye, there it was. </span>
      <span id="f0132">A hardly perceptible blue irregular outline, indicating the bold contour of the lofty heights of Nukuheva.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0133">This island, although generally called one of the Marquesas, is by some navigators considered as forming one of a distinct cluster, comprising the islands of Ruhooka, Ropo, and Nukuheva; upon which three the appellation of the Washington Group has been bestowed. </span>
      <span id="f0134">They form a triangle, and lie within the parallels of 8 degrees 38” and 9 degrees 32” South latitude and 139 degrees 20” and 140 degrees 10” West longitude from Greenwich. </span>
      <span id="f0135">With how little propriety they are to be regarded as forming a separate group will be at once apparent, when it is considered that they lie in the immediate vicinity of the other islands, that is to say, less than a degree to the northwest of them; that their inhabitants speak the Marquesan dialect, and that their laws, religion, and general customs are identical. </span>
      <span id="f0136">The only reason why they were ever thus arbitrarily distinguished may be attributed to the singular fact, that their existence was altogether unknown to the world until the year 1791, when they were discovered by Captain Ingraham, of Boston, Massachusetts, nearly two centuries after the discovery of the adjacent islands by the agent of the Spanish Viceroy. </span>
      <span id="f0137">Notwithstanding this, I shall follow the example of most voyagers, and treat of them as forming part and parcel of Marquesas.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0138">Nukuheva is the most important of these islands, being the only one at which ships are much in the habit of touching, and is celebrated as being the place where the adventurous Captain Porter refitted his ships during the late war between England and the United States, and whence he sallied out upon the large whaling fleet then sailing under the enemy’s flag in the surrounding seas. </span>
      <span id="f0139">This island is about twenty miles in length and nearly as many in breadth. </span>
      <span id="f0140">It has three good harbours on its coast; the largest and best of which is called by the people living in its vicinity ‘Taiohae’, and by Captain Porter was denominated Massachusetts Bay. </span>
      <span id="f0141">Among the adverse tribes dwelling about the shores of the other bays, and by all voyagers, it is generally known by the name bestowed upon the island itself--Nukuheva. </span>
      <span id="f0142">Its inhabitants have become somewhat corrupted, owing to their recent commerce with Europeans, but so far as regards their peculiar customs and general mode of life, they retain their original primitive character, remaining very nearly in the same state of nature in which they were first beheld by white men. </span>
      <span id="f0143">The hostile clans, residing in the more remote sections of the island, and very seldom holding any communication with foreigners, are in every respect unchanged from their earliest known condition.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0144">In the bay of Nukuheva was the anchorage we desired to reach. </span>
      <span id="f0145">We had perceived the loom of the mountains about sunset; so that after running all night with a very light breeze, we found ourselves close in with the island the next morning, but as the bay we sought lay on its farther side, we were obliged to sail some distance along the shore, catching, as we proceeded, short glimpses of blooming valleys, deep glens, waterfalls, and waving groves hidden here and there by projecting and rocky headlands, every moment opening to the view some new and startling scene of beauty.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0146">Those who for the first time visit the South Sea, generally are surprised at the appearance of the islands when beheld from the sea. </span>
      <span id="f0147">From the vague accounts we sometimes have of their beauty, many people are apt to picture to themselves enamelled and softly swelling plains, shaded over with delicious groves, and watered by purling brooks, and the entire country but little elevated above the surrounding ocean. </span>
      <span id="f0148">The reality is very different; bold rock-bound coasts, with the surf beating high against the lofty cliffs, and broken here and there into deep inlets, which open to the view thickly-wooded valleys, separated by the spurs of mountains clothed with tufted grass, and sweeping down towards the sea from an elevated and furrowed interior, form the principal features of these islands.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0149">Towards noon we drew abreast the entrance go the harbour, and at last we slowly swept by the intervening promontory, and entered the bay of Nukuheva. </span>
      <span id="f0150">No description can do justice to its beauty; but that beauty was lost to me then, and I saw nothing but the tri-coloured flag of France trailing over the stern of six vessels, whose black hulls and bristling broadsides proclaimed their warlike character. </span>
      <span id="f0151">There they were, floating in that lovely bay, the green eminences of the shore looking down so tranquilly upon them, as if rebuking the sternness of their aspect. </span>
      <span id="f0152">To my eye nothing could be more out of keeping than the presence of these vessels; but we soon learnt what brought them there. </span>
      <span id="f0153">The whole group of islands had just been taken possession of by Rear-Admiral Du Petit Thouars, in the name of the invincible French nation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0154">This item of information was imparted to us by a most extraordinary individual, a genuine South-Sea vagabond, who came alongside of us in a whale-boat as soon as we entered the bay, and, by the aid of some benevolent persons at the gangway, was assisted on board, for our visitor was in that interesting stage of intoxication when a man is amiable and helpless. </span>
      <span id="f0155">Although he was utterly unable to stand erect or to navigate his body across the deck, he still magnanimously proffered his services to pilot the ship to a good and secure anchorage. </span>
      <span id="f0156">Our captain, however, rather distrusted his ability in this respect, and refused to recognize his claim to the character he assumed; but our gentleman was determined to play his part, for, by dint of much scrambling, he succeeded in getting into the weather-quarter boat, where he steadied himself by holding on to a shroud, and then commenced issuing his commands with amazing volubility and very peculiar gestures. </span>
      <span id="f0157">Of course no one obeyed his orders; but as it was impossible to quiet him, we swept by the ships of the squadron with this strange fellow performing his antics in full view of all the French officers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0158">We afterwards learned that our eccentric friend had been a lieutenant in the English navy; but having disgraced his flag by some criminal conduct in one of the principal ports on the main, he had deserted his ship, and spent many years wandering among the islands of the Pacific, until accidentally being at Nukuheva when the French took possession of the place, he had been appointed pilot of the harbour by the newly constituted authorities.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0159">As we slowly advanced up the bay, numerous canoes pushed off from the surrounding shores, and we were soon in the midst of quite a flotilla of them, their savage occupants struggling to get aboard of us, and jostling one another in their ineffectual attempts. </span>
      <span id="f0160">Occasionally the projecting out-riggers of their slight shallops running foul of one another, would become entangled beneath the water, threatening to capsize the canoes, when a scene of confusion would ensue that baffles description. </span>
      <span id="f0161">Such strange outcries and passionate gesticulations I never certainly heard or saw before. </span>
      <span id="f0162">You would have thought the islanders were on the point of flying at each other’s throats, whereas they were only amicably engaged in disentangling their boats.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0163">Scattered here and there among the canoes might be seen numbers of cocoanuts floating closely together in circular groups, and bobbing up and down with every wave. </span>
      <span id="f0164">By some inexplicable means these cocoanuts were all steadily approaching towards the ship. </span>
      <span id="f0165">As I leaned curiously over the side, endeavouring to solve their mysterious movements, one mass far in advance of the rest attracted my attention. </span>
      <span id="f0166">In its centre was something I could take for nothing else than a cocoanut, but which I certainly considered one of the most extraordinary specimens of the fruit I had ever seen. </span>
      <span id="f0167">It kept twirling and dancing about among the rest in the most singular manner, and as it drew nearer I thought it bore a remarkable resemblance to the brown shaven skull of one of the savages. </span>
      <span id="f0168">Presently it betrayed a pair of eyes, and soon I became aware that what I had supposed to have been one of the fruit was nothing else than the head of an islander, who had adopted this singular method of bringing his produce to market. </span>
      <span id="f0169">The cocoanuts were all attached to one another by strips of the husk, partly torn from the shell and rudely fastened together. </span>
      <span id="f0170">Their proprietor inserting his head into the midst of them, impelled his necklace of cocoanuts through the water by striking out beneath the surface with his feet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0171">I was somewhat astonished to perceive that among the number of natives that surrounded us, not a single female was to be seen. </span>
      <span id="f0172">At that time I was ignorant of the fact that by the operation of the ‘taboo’ the use of canoes in all parts of the island is rigorously prohibited to the entire sex, for whom it is death even to be seen entering one when hauled on shore; consequently, whenever a Marquesan lady voyages by water, she puts in requisition the paddles of her own fair body.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0173">We had approached within a mile and a half perhaps of this foot of the bay, when some of the islanders, who by this time had managed to scramble aboard of us at the risk of swamping their canoes, directed our attention to a singular commotion in the water ahead of the vessel. </span>
      <span id="f0174">At first I imagined it to be produced by a shoal of fish sporting on the surface, but our savage friends assured us that it was caused by a shoal of ‘whinhenies’ (young girls), who in this manner were coming off from the shore to welcome is. </span>
      <span id="f0175">As they drew nearer, and I watched the rising and sinking of their forms, and beheld the uplifted right arm bearing above the water the girdle of tappa, and their long dark hair trailing beside them as they swam, I almost fancied they could be nothing else than so many mermaids--and very like mermaids they behaved too.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0176">We were still some distance from the beach, and under slow headway, when we sailed right into the midst of these swimming nymphs, and they boarded us at every quarter; many seizing hold of the chain-plates and springing into the chains; others, at the peril of being run over by the vessel in her course, catching at the bob-stays, and wreathing their slender forms about the ropes, hung suspended in the air. </span>
      <span id="f0177">All of them at length succeeded in getting up the ship’s side, where they clung dripping with the brine and glowing from the bath, their jet-black tresses streaming over their shoulders, and half enveloping their otherwise naked forms. </span>
      <span id="f0178">There they hung, sparkling with savage vivacity, laughing gaily at one another, and chattering away with infinite glee. </span>
      <span id="f0179">Nor were they idle the while, for each one performed the simple offices of the toilette for the other. </span>
      <span id="f0180">Their luxuriant locks, wound up and twisted into the smallest possible compass, were freed from the briny element; the whole person carefully dried, and from a little round shell that passed from hand to hand, anointed with a fragrant oil: their adornments were completed by passing a few loose folds of white tappa, in a modest cincture, around the waist. </span>
      <span id="f0181">Thus arrayed they no longer hesitated, but flung themselves lightly over the bulwarks, and were quickly frolicking about the decks. </span>
      <span id="f0182">Many of them went forward, perching upon the headrails or running out upon the bowsprit, while others seated themselves upon the taffrail, or reclined at full length upon the boats. </span>
      <span id="f0183">What a sight for us bachelor sailors! </span>
      <span id="f0184">How avoid so dire a temptation? </span>
      <span id="f0185">For who could think of tumbling these artless creatures overboard, when they had swum miles to welcome us?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0186">Their appearance perfectly amazed me; their extreme youth, the light clear brown of their complexions, their delicate features, and inexpressibly graceful figures, their softly moulded limbs, and free unstudied action, seemed as strange as beautiful.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0187">The Dolly was fairly captured; and never I will say was vessel carried before by such a dashing and irresistible party of boarders! </span>
      <span id="f0188">The ship taken, we could not do otherwise than yield ourselves prisoners, and for the whole period that she remained in the bay, the Dolly, as well as her crew, were completely in the hands of the mermaids.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0189">In the evening after we had come to an anchor the deck was illuminated with lanterns, and this picturesque band of sylphs, tricked out with flowers, and dressed in robes of variegated tappa, got up a ball in great style. </span>
      <span id="f0190">These females are passionately fond of dancing, and in the wild grace and spirit of the style excel everything I have ever seen. </span>
      <span id="f0191">The varied dances of the Marquesan girls are beautiful in the extreme, but there is an abandoned voluptuousness in their character which I dare not attempt to describe.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>