<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
      <p>
      <span id="f00237">CHAPTER FOUR</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00238">STATE OF AFFAIRS ABOARD THE SHIP--CONTENTS OF HER LARDER--LENGTH OF SOUTH SEAMEN’S VOYAGES--ACCOUNT OF A FLYING WHALE-MAN--DETERMINATION TO LEAVE THE VESSEL--THE BAY OF NUKUHEVA--THE TYPEES--INVASION OF THEIR VALLEY BY PORTER--REFLECTIONS--GLEN OF TIOR--INTERVIEW BETWEEN THE OLD KING AND THE FRENCH ADMIRAL</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00239">OUR ship had not been many days in the harbour of Nukuheva before I came to the determination of leaving her. </span>
      <span id="f00240">That my reasons for resolving to take this step were numerous and weighty, may be inferred from the fact that I chose rather to risk my fortunes among the savages of the island than to endure another voyage on board the Dolly. </span>
      <span id="f00241">To use the concise, pointblank phrase of the sailors. </span>
      <span id="f00242">I had made up my mind to ‘run away’. </span>
      <span id="f00243">Now as a meaning is generally attached to these two words no way flattering to the individual to whom they are applied, it behoves me, for the sake of my own character, to offer some explanation of my conduct.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00244">When I entered on board the Dolly, I signed as a matter of course the ship’s articles, thereby voluntarily engaging and legally binding myself to serve in a certain capacity for the period of the voyage; and, special considerations apart, I was of course bound to fulfill the agreement. </span>
      <span id="f00245">But in all contracts, if one party fail to perform his share of the compact, is not the other virtually absolved from his liability? </span>
      <span id="f00246">Who is there who will not answer in the affirmative?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00247">Having settled the principle, then, let me apply it to the particular case in question. </span>
      <span id="f00248">In numberless instances had not only the implied but the specified conditions of the articles been violated on the part of the ship in which I served. </span>
      <span id="f00249">The usage on board of her was tyrannical; the sick had been inhumanly neglected; the provisions had been doled out in scanty allowance; and her cruises were unreasonably protracted. </span>
      <span id="f00250">The captain was the author of the abuses; it was in vain to think that he would either remedy them, or alter his conduct, which was arbitrary and violent in the extreme. </span>
      <span id="f00251">His prompt reply to all complaints and remonstrances was--the butt-end of a handspike, so convincingly administered as effectually to silence the aggrieved party.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00252">To whom could we apply for redress? </span>
      <span id="f00253">We had left both law and equity on the other side of the Cape; and unfortunately, with a very few exceptions, our crew was composed of a parcel of dastardly and meanspirited wretches, divided among themselves, and only united in enduring without resistance the unmitigated tyranny of the captain. </span>
      <span id="f00254">It would have been mere madness for any two or three of the number, unassisted by the rest, to attempt making a stand against his ill usage. </span>
      <span id="f00255">They would only have called down upon themselves the particular vengeance of this ‘Lord of the Plank’, and subjected their shipmates to additional hardships.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00256">But, after all, these things could have been endured awhile, had we entertained the hope of being speedily delivered from them by the due completion of the term of our servitude. </span>
      <span id="f00257">But what a dismal prospect awaited us in this quarter! </span>
      <span id="f00258">The longevity of Cape Horn whaling voyages is proverbial, frequently extending over a period of four or five years.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00259">Some long-haired, bare-necked youths, who, forced by the united influences of Captain Marryatt and hard times, embark at Nantucket for a pleasure excursion to the Pacific, and whose anxious mothers provide them, with bottled milk for the occasion, oftentimes return very respectable middle-aged gentlemen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00260">The very preparations made for one of these expeditions are enough to frighten one. </span>
      <span id="f00261">As the vessel carries out no cargo, her hold is filled with provisions for her own consumption. </span>
      <span id="f00262">The owners, who officiate as caterers for the voyage, supply the larder with an abundance of dainties. </span>
      <span id="f00263">Delicate morsels of beef and pork, cut on scientific principles from every part of the animal, and of all conceivable shapes and sizes, are carefully packed in salt, and stored away in barrels; affording a never-ending variety in their different degrees of toughness, and in the peculiarities of their saline properties. </span>
      <span id="f00264">Choice old water too, decanted into stout six-barrel-casks, and two pints of which is allowed every day to each soul on board; together with ample store of sea-bread, previously reduced to a state of petrifaction, with a view to preserve it either from decay or consumption in the ordinary mode, are likewise provided for the nourishment and gastronomic enjoyment of the crew.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00265">But not to speak of the quality of these articles of sailors’ fare, the abundance in which they are put onboard a whaling vessel is almost incredible. </span>
      <span id="f00266">Oftentimes, when we had occasion to break out in the hold, and I beheld the successive tiers of casks and barrels, whose contents were all destined to be consumed in due course by the ship’s company, my heart has sunk within me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00267">Although, as a general case, a ship unlucky in falling in with whales continues to cruise after them until she has barely sufficient provisions remaining to take her home, turning round then quietly and making the best of her way to her friends, yet there are instances when even this natural obstacle to the further prosecution of the voyage is overcome by headstrong captains, who, bartering the fruits of their hard-earned toils for a new supply of provisions in some of the ports of Chili or Peru, begin the voyage afresh with unabated zeal and perseverance. </span>
      <span id="f00268">It is in vain that the owners write urgent letters to him to sail for home, and for their sake to bring back the ship, since it appears he can put nothing in her. </span>
      <span id="f00269">Not he. </span>
      <span id="f00270">He has registered a vow: he will fill his vessel with good sperm oil, or failing to do so, never again strike Yankee soundings.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00271">I heard of one whaler, which after many years’ absence was given up for lost. </span>
      <span id="f00272">The last that had been heard of her was a shadowy report of her having touched at some of those unstable islands in the far Pacific, whose eccentric wanderings are carefully noted in each new edition of the South-Sea charts. </span>
      <span id="f00273">After a long interval, however, ‘The Perseverance’--for that was her name--was spoken somewhere in the vicinity of the ends of the earth, cruising along as leisurely as ever, her sails all bepatched and be quilted with rope-yarns, her spars fished with old pipe staves, and her rigging knotted and spliced in every possible direction. </span>
      <span id="f00274">Her crew was composed of some twenty venerable Greenwich-pensioner-looking old salts, who just managed to hobble about deck. </span>
      <span id="f00275">The ends of all the running ropes, with the exception of the signal halyards and poop-down-haul, were rove through snatch-blocks, and led to the capstan or windlass, so that not a yard was braced or a sail set without the assistance of machinery.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00276">Her hull was encrusted with barnacles, which completely encased her. </span>
      <span id="f00277">Three pet sharks followed in her wake, and every day came alongside to regale themselves from the contents of the cook’s bucket, which were pitched over to them. </span>
      <span id="f00278">A vast shoal of bonetas and albicores always kept her company.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00279">Such was the account I heard of this vessel and the remembrance of it always haunted me; what eventually became of her I never learned; at any rate: he never reached home, and I suppose she is still regularly tacking twice in the twenty-four hours somewhere off Desolate Island, or the Devil’s-Tail Peak.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00280">Having said thus much touching the usual length of these voyages, when I inform the reader that ours had as it were just commenced, we being only fifteen months out, and even at that time hailed as a late arrival and boarded for news, he will readily perceive that there was little to encourage one in looking forward to the future, especially as I had always had a presentiment that we should make an unfortunate voyage, and our experience so far had justified the expectation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00281">I may here state, and on my faith as an honest man, that though more than three years have elapsed since I left this same identical vessel, she still continues; in the Pacific, and but a few days since I saw her reported in the papers as having touched at the Sandwich Islands previous to going on the coast of Japan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00282">But to return to my narrative. </span>
      <span id="f00283">Placed in these circumstances then, with no prospect of matters mending if I remained aboard the Dolly, I at once made up my mind to leave her: to be sure it was rather an inglorious thing to steal away privily from those at whose hands I had received wrongs and outrages that I could not resent; but how was such a course to be avoided when it was the only alternative left me? </span>
      <span id="f00284">Having made up my mind, I proceeded to acquire all the information I could obtain relating to the island and its inhabitants, with a view of shaping my plans of escape accordingly. </span>
      <span id="f00285">The result of these inquiries I will now state, in order that the ensuing narrative may be the better understood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00286">The bay of Nukuheva in which we were then lying is an expanse of water not unlike in figure the space included within the limits of a horse-shoe. </span>
      <span id="f00287">It is, perhaps, nine miles in circumference. </span>
      <span id="f00288">You approach it from the sea by a narrow entrance, flanked on each side by two small twin islets which soar conically to the height of some five hundred feet. </span>
      <span id="f00289">From these the shore recedes on both hands, and describes a deep semicircle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00290">From the verge of the water the land rises uniformly on all sides, with green and sloping acclivities, until from gently rolling hill-sides and moderate elevations it insensibly swells into lofty and majestic heights, whose blue outlines, ranged all around, close in the view. </span>
      <span id="f00291">The beautiful aspect of the shore is heightened by deep and romantic glens, which come down to it at almost equal distances, all apparently radiating from a common centre, and the upper extremities of which are lost to the eye beneath the shadow of the mountains. </span>
      <span id="f00292">Down each of these little valleys flows a clear stream, here and there assuming the form of a slender cascade, then stealing invisibly along until it bursts upon the sight again in larger and more noisy waterfalls, and at last demurely wanders along to the sea.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00293">The houses of the natives, constructed of the yellow bamboo, tastefully twisted together in a kind of wicker-work, and thatched with the long tapering leaves of the palmetto, are scattered irregularly along these valleys beneath the shady branches of the cocoanut trees.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00294">Nothing can exceed the imposing scenery of this bay. </span>
      <span id="f00295">Viewed from our ship as she lay at anchor in the middle of the harbour, it presented the appearance of a vast natural amphitheatre in decay, and overgrown with vines, the deep glens that furrowed it’s sides appearing like enormous fissures caused by the ravages of time. </span>
      <span id="f00296">Very often when lost in admiration at its beauty, I have experienced a pang of regret that a scene so enchanting should be hidden from the world in these remote seas, and seldom meet the eyes of devoted lovers of nature.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00297">Besides this bay the shores of the island are indented by several other extensive inlets, into which descend broad and verdant valleys. </span>
      <span id="f00298">These are inhabited by as many distinct tribes of savages, who, although speaking kindred dialects of a common language, and having the same religion and laws, have from time immemorial waged hereditary warfare against each other. </span>
      <span id="f00299">The intervening mountains generally two or three thousand feet above the level of the sea geographically define the territories of each of these hostile tribes, who never cross them, save on some expedition of war or plunder. </span>
      <span id="f00300">Immediately adjacent to Nukuheva, and only separated from it by the mountains seen from the harbour, lies the lovely valley of Happar, whose inmates cherish the most friendly relations with the inhabitants of Nukuheva. </span>
      <span id="f00301">On the other side of Happar, and closely adjoining it, is the magnificent valley of the dreaded Typees, the unappeasable enemies of both these tribes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00302">These celebrated warriors appear to inspire the other islanders with unspeakable terrors. </span>
      <span id="f00303">Their very name is a frightful one; for the word ‘Typee’ in the Marquesan dialect signifies a lover of human flesh. </span>
      <span id="f00304">It is rather singular that the title should have been bestowed upon them exclusively, inasmuch as the natives of all this group are irreclaimable cannibals. </span>
      <span id="f00305">The name may, perhaps, have been given to denote the peculiar ferocity of this clan, and to convey a special stigma along with it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00306">These same Typees enjoy a prodigious notoriety all over the islands. </span>
      <span id="f00307">The natives of Nukuheva would frequently recount in pantomime to our ship’s company their terrible feats, and would show the marks of wounds they had received in desperate encounters with them. </span>
      <span id="f00308">When ashore they would try to frighten us by pointing, to one of their own number, and calling him a Typee, manifesting no little surprise that we did not take to our heels at so terrible an announcement. </span>
      <span id="f00309">It was quite amusing, too, to see with what earnestness they disclaimed all cannibal propensities on their own part, while they denounced their enemies--the Typees--as inveterate gourmandizers of human flesh; but this is a peculiarity to which I shall hereafter have occasion to allude.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00310">Although I was convinced that the inhabitants of our bay were as arrant cannibals as any of the other tribes on the island, still I could not but feel a particular and most unqualified repugnance to the aforesaid Typees. </span>
      <span id="f00311">Even before visiting the Marquesas, I had heard from men who had touched at the group on former voyages some revolting stories in connection with these savages; and fresh in my remembrance was the adventure of the master of the Katherine, who only a few months previous, imprudently venturing into this bay in an armed boat for the purpose of barter, was seized by the natives, carried back a little distance into their valley, and was only saved from a cruel death by the intervention of a young girl, who facilitated his escape by night along the beach to Nukuheva.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00312">I had heard too of an English vessel that many years ago, after a weary cruise, sought to enter the bay of Nukuheva, and arriving within two or three miles of the land, was met by a large canoe filled with natives, who offered to lead the way to the place of their destination. </span>
      <span id="f00313">The captain, unacquainted with the localities of the island, joyfully acceded to the proposition--the canoe paddled on, the ship followed. </span>
      <span id="f00314">She was soon conducted to a beautiful inlet, and dropped her anchor in its waters beneath the shadows of the lofty shore. </span>
      <span id="f00315">That same night the perfidious Typees, who had thus inveigled her into their fatal bay, flocked aboard the doomed vessel by hundreds, and at a given signal murdered every soul on board.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00316">I shall never forget the observation of one of our crew as we were passing slowly by the entrance of the bay in our way to Nukuheva. </span>
      <span id="f00317">As we stood gazing over the side at the verdant headlands, Ned, pointing with his hand in the direction of the treacherous valley, exclaimed, ‘There--there’s Typee. </span>
      <span id="f00318">Oh, the bloody cannibals, what a meal they’d make of us if we were to take it into our heads to land! </span>
      <span id="f00319">but they say they don’t like sailor’s flesh, it’s too salt. </span>
      <span id="f00320">I say, maty, how should you like to be shoved ashore there, eh?’ I little thought, as I shuddered at the question, that in the space of a few weeks I should actually be a captive in that self-same valley.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00321">The French, although they had gone through the ceremony of hoisting their colours for a few hours at all the principal places of the group, had not as yet visited the bay of Typee, anticipating a fierce resistance on the part of the savages there, which for the present at least they wished to avoid. </span>
      <span id="f00322">Perhaps they were not a little influenced in the adoption of this unusual policy from a recollection of the warlike reception given by the Typees to the forces of Captain Porter, about the year 1814, when that brave and accomplished officer endeavoured to subjugate the clan merely to gratify the mortal hatred of his allies the Nukuhevas and Happars.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00323">On that occasion I have been told that a considerable detachment of sailors and marines from the frigate Essex, accompanied by at least two thousand warriors of Happar and Nukuheva, landed in boats and canoes at the head of the bay, and after penetrating a little distance into the valley, met with the stoutest resistance from its inmates. </span>
      <span id="f00324">Valiantly, although with much loss, the Typees disputed every inch of ground, and after some hard fighting obliged their assailants to retreat and abandon their design of conquest.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00325">The invaders, on their march back to the sea, consoled themselves for their repulse by setting fire to every house and temple in their route; and a long line of smoking ruins defaced the once-smiling bosom of the valley, and proclaimed to its pagan inhabitants the spirit that reigned in the breasts of Christian soldiers. </span>
      <span id="f00326">Who can wonder at the deadly hatred of the Typees to all foreigners after such unprovoked atrocities?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00327">Thus it is that they whom we denominate ‘savages’ are made to deserve the title. </span>
      <span id="f00328">When the inhabitants of some sequestered island first descry the ‘big canoe’ of the European rolling through the blue waters towards their shores, they rush down to the beach in crowds, and with open arms stand ready to embrace the strangers. </span>
      <span id="f00329">Fatal embrace! </span>
      <span id="f00330">They fold to their bosom the vipers whose sting is destined to poison all their joys; and the instinctive feeling of love within their breast is soon converted into the bitterest hate.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00331">The enormities perpetrated in the South Seas upon some of the inoffensive islanders will nigh pass belief. </span>
      <span id="f00332">These things are seldom proclaimed at home; they happen at the very ends of the earth; they are done in a corner, and there are none to reveal them. </span>
      <span id="f00333">But there is, nevertheless, many a petty trader that has navigated the Pacific whose course from island to island might be traced by a series of cold-blooded robberies, kidnappings, and murders, the iniquity of which might be considered almost sufficient to sink her guilty timbers to the bottom of the sea.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00334">Sometimes vague accounts of such thing’s reach our firesides, and we coolly censure them as wrong, impolitic, needlessly severe, and dangerous to the crews of other vessels. </span>
      <span id="f00335">How different is our tone when we read the highly-wrought description of the massacre of the crew of the Hobomak by the Feejees; how we sympathize for the unhappy victims, and with what horror do we regard the diabolical heathens, who, after all, have but avenged the unprovoked injuries which they have received. </span>
      <span id="f00336">We breathe nothing but vengeance, and equip armed vessels to traverse thousands of miles of ocean in order to execute summary punishment upon the offenders. </span>
      <span id="f00337">On arriving at their destination, they burn, slaughter, and destroy, according to the tenor of written instructions, and sailing away from the scene of devastation, call upon all Christendom to applaud their courage and their justice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00338">How often is the term ‘savages’ incorrectly applied! </span>
      <span id="f00339">None really deserving of it were ever yet discovered by voyagers or by travellers. </span>
      <span id="f00340">They have discovered heathens and barbarians whom by horrible cruelties they have exasperated into savages. </span>
      <span id="f00341">It may be asserted without fear of contradictions that in all the cases of outrages committed by Polynesians, Europeans have at some time or other been the aggressors, and that the cruel and bloodthirsty disposition of some of the islanders is mainly to be ascribed to the influence of such examples.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00342">But to return. </span>
      <span id="f00343">Owing to the mutual hostilities of the different tribes I have mentioned, the mountainous tracts which separate their respective territories remain altogether uninhabited; the natives invariably dwelling in the depths of the valleys, with a view of securing themselves from the predatory incursions of their enemies, who often lurk along their borders, ready to cut off any imprudent straggler, or make a descent upon the inmates of some sequestered habitation. </span>
      <span id="f00344">I several times met with very aged men, who from this cause had never passed the confines of their native vale, some of them having never even ascended midway up the mountains in the whole course of their lives, and who, accordingly had little idea of the appearance of any other part of the island, the whole of which is not perhaps more than sixty miles in circuit. </span>
      <span id="f00345">The little space in which some of these clans pass away their days would seem almost incredible.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00346">The glen of the Tior will furnish a curious illustration of this.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00347">The inhabited part is not more than four miles in length, and varies in breadth from half a mile to less than a quarter. </span>
      <span id="f00348">The rocky vine-clad cliffs on one side tower almost perpendicularly from their base to the height of at least fifteen hundred feet; while across the vale--in striking contrast to the scenery opposite--grass-grown elevations rise one above another in blooming terraces. </span>
      <span id="f00349">Hemmed in by these stupendous barriers, the valley would be altogether shut out from the rest of the world, were it not that it is accessible from the sea at one end, and by a narrow defile at the other.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00350">The impression produced upon the mind, when I first visited this beautiful glen, will never be obliterated.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00351">I had come from Nukuheva by water in the ship’s boat, and when we entered the bay of Tior it was high noon. </span>
      <span id="f00352">The heat had been intense, as we had been floating upon the long smooth swell of the ocean, for there was but little wind. </span>
      <span id="f00353">The sun’s rays had expended all their fury upon us; and to add to our discomfort, we had omitted to supply ourselves with water previous to starting. </span>
      <span id="f00354">What with heat and thirst together, I became so impatient to get ashore, that when at last we glided towards it, I stood up in the bow of the boat ready for a spring. </span>
      <span id="f00355">As she shot two-thirds of her length high upon the beach, propelled by three or four strong strokes of the oars, I leaped among a parcel of juvenile savages, who stood prepared to give us a kind reception; and with them at my heels, yelling like so many imps, I rushed forward across the open ground in the vicinity of the sea, and plunged, diver fashion, into the recesses of the first grove that offered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00356">What a delightful sensation did I experience! </span>
      <span id="f00357">I felt as if floating in some new element, while all sort of gurgling, trickling, liquid sounds fell upon my ear. </span>
      <span id="f00358">People may say what they will about the refreshing influences of a coldwater bath, but commend me when in a perspiration to the shade baths of Tior, beneath the cocoanut trees, and amidst the cool delightful atmosphere which surrounds them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00359">How shall I describe the scenery that met my eye, as I looked out from this verdant recess! </span>
      <span id="f00360">The narrow valley, with its steep and close adjoining sides draperied with vines, and arched overhead with a fret-work of interlacing boughs, nearly hidden from view by masses of leafy verdure, seemed from where I stood like an immense arbour disclosing its vista to the eye, whilst as I advanced it insensibly widened into the loveliest vale eye ever beheld.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00361">It so happened that the very day I was in Tior the French admiral, attended by all the boats of his squadron, came down in state from Nukuheva to take formal possession of the place. </span>
      <span id="f00362">He remained in the valley about two hours, during which time he had a ceremonious interview with the king. </span>
      <span id="f00363">The patriarch-sovereign of Tior was a man very far advanced in years; but though age had bowed his form and rendered him almost decrepid, his gigantic frame retained its original magnitude and grandeur of appearance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00364">He advanced slowly and with evident pain, assisting his tottering steps with the heavy warspear he held in his hand, and attended by a group of grey-bearded chiefs, on one of whom he occasionally leaned for support. </span>
      <span id="f00365">The admiral came forward with head uncovered and extended hand, while the old king saluted him by a stately flourish of his weapon. </span>
      <span id="f00366">The next moment they stood side by side, these two extremes of the social scale,--the polished, splendid Frenchman, and the poor tattooed savage. </span>
      <span id="f00367">They were both tall and noble-looking men; but in other respects how strikingly contrasted! </span>
      <span id="f00368">Du Petit Thouars exhibited upon his person all the paraphernalia of his naval rank. </span>
      <span id="f00369">He wore a richly decorated admiral’s frock-coat, a laced chapeau bras, and upon his breast were a variety of ribbons and orders; while the simple islander, with the exception of a slight cincture about his loins, appeared in all the nakedness of nature.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00370">At what an immeasurable distance, thought I, are these two beings removed from each other. </span>
      <span id="f00371">In the one is shown the result of long centuries of progressive Civilization and refinement, which have gradually converted the mere creature into the semblance of all that is elevated and grand; while the other, after the lapse of the same period, has not advanced one step in the career of improvement, ‘Yet, after all,’ quoth I to myself, ‘insensible as he is to a thousand wants, and removed from harassing cares, may not the savage be the happier man of the two?’ Such were the thoughts that arose in my mind as I gazed upon the novel spectacle before me. </span>
      <span id="f00372">In truth it was an impressive one, and little likely to be effaced. </span>
      <span id="f00373">I can recall even now with vivid distinctness every feature of the scene. </span>
      <span id="f00374">The umbrageous shades where the interview took place--the glorious tropical vegetation around--the picturesque grouping of the mingled throng of soldiery and natives--and even the golden-hued bunch of bananas that I held in my hand at the time, and of which I occasionally partook while making the aforesaid philosophical reflections.</span>
      </p>
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>