<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER FIVE</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0375">CHAPTER FIVE</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0376">THOUGHTS PREVIOUS TO ATTEMPTING AN ESCAPE--TOBY, A FELLOW SAILOR, AGREES TO SHARE THE ADVENTURE--LAST NIGHT ABOARD THE SHIP</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0377">HAVING fully resolved to leave the vessel clandestinely, and having acquired all the knowledge concerning the bay that I could obtain under the circumstances in which I was placed, I now deliberately turned over in my mind every plan to escape that suggested itself, being determined to act with all possible prudence in an attempt where failure would be attended with so many disagreeable consequences. </span>
      <span id="f0378">The idea of being taken and brought back ignominiously to the ship was so inexpressibly repulsive to me, that I was determined by no hasty and imprudent measures to render such an event probable.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0379">I knew that our worthy captain, who felt, such a paternal solicitude for the welfare of his crew, would not willingly consent that one of his best hands should encounter the perils of a sojourn among the natives of a barbarous island; and I was certain that in the event of my disappearance, his fatherly anxiety would prompt him to offer, by way of a reward, yard upon yard of gaily printed calico for my apprehension. </span>
      <span id="f0380">He might even have appreciated my services at the value of a musket, in which case I felt perfectly certain that the whole population of the bay would be immediately upon my track, incited by the prospect of so magnificent a bounty.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0381">Having ascertained the fact before alluded to, that the islanders,--from motives of precaution, dwelt altogether in the depths of the valleys, and avoided wandering about the more elevated portions of the shore, unless bound on some expedition of war or plunder, I concluded that if I could effect unperceived a passage to the mountain, I might easily remain among them, supporting myself by such fruits as came in my way until the sailing of the ship, an event of which I could not fail to be immediately apprised, as from my lofty position I should command a view of the entire harbour.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0382">The idea pleased me greatly. </span>
      <span id="f0383">It seemed to combine a great deal of practicability with no inconsiderable enjoyment in a quiet way; for how delightful it would be to look down upon the detested old vessel from the height of some thousand feet, and contrast the verdant scenery about me with the recollection of her narrow decks and gloomy forecastle! </span>
      <span id="f0384">Why, it was really refreshing even to think of it; and so I straightway fell to picturing myself seated beneath a cocoanut tree on the brow of the mountain, with a cluster of plantains within easy reach, criticizing her nautical evolutions as she was working her way out of the harbour.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0385">To be sure there was one rather unpleasant drawback to these agreeable anticipations--the possibility of falling in with a foraging party of these same bloody-minded Typees, whose appetites, edged perhaps by the air of so elevated a region, might prompt them to devour one. </span>
      <span id="f0386">This, I must confess, was a most disagreeable view of the matter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0387">Just to think of a party of these unnatural gourmands taking it into their heads to make a convivial meal of a poor devil, who would have no means of escape or defence: however, there was no help for it. </span>
      <span id="f0388">I was willing to encounter some risks in order to accomplish my object, and counted much upon my ability to elude these prowling cannibals amongst the many coverts which the mountains afforded. </span>
      <span id="f0389">Besides, the chances were ten to one in my favour that they would none of them quit their own fastnesses.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0390">I had determined not to communicate my design of withdrawing from the vessel to any of my shipmates, and least of all to solicit any one to accompany me in my flight. </span>
      <span id="f0391">But it so happened one night, that being upon deck, revolving over in my mind various plans of escape, I perceived one of the ship’s company leaning over the bulwarks, apparently plunged in a profound reverie. </span>
      <span id="f0392">He was a young fellow about my own age, for whom I had all along entertained a great regard; and Toby, such was the name by which he went among us, for his real name he would never tell us, was every way worthy of it. </span>
      <span id="f0393">He was active, ready and obliging, of dauntless courage, and singularly open and fearless in the expression of his feelings. </span>
      <span id="f0394">I had on more than one occasion got him out of scrapes into which this had led him; and I know not whether it was from this cause, or a certain congeniality of sentiment between us, that he had always shown a partiality for my society. </span>
      <span id="f0395">We had battled out many a long watch together, beguiling the weary hours with chat, song, and story, mingled with a good many imprecations upon the hard destiny it seemed our common fortune to encounter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0396">Toby, like myself, had evidently moved in a different sphere of life, and his conversation at times betrayed this, although he was anxious to conceal it. </span>
      <span id="f0397">He was one of that class of rovers you sometimes meet at sea, who never reveal their origin, never allude to home, and go rambling over the world as if pursued by some mysterious fate they cannot possibly elude.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0398">There was much even in the appearance of Toby calculated to draw me towards him, for while the greater part of the crew were as coarse in person as in mind, Toby was endowed with a remarkably prepossessing exterior. </span>
      <span id="f0399">Arrayed in his blue frock and duck trousers, he was as smart a looking sailor as ever stepped upon a deck; he was singularly small and slightly made, with great flexibility of limb. </span>
      <span id="f0400">His naturally dark complexion had been deepened by exposure to the tropical sun, and a mass of jetty locks clustered about his temples, and threw a darker shade into his large black eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0401">He was a strange wayward being, moody, fitful, and melancholy--at times almost morose. </span>
      <span id="f0402">He had a quick and fiery temper too, which, when thoroughly roused, transported him into a state bordering on delirium.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0403">It is strange the power that a mind of deep passion has over feebler natures. </span>
      <span id="f0404">I have seen a brawny, fellow, with no lack of ordinary courage, fairly quail before this slender stripling, when in one of his curious fits. </span>
      <span id="f0405">But these paroxysms seldom occurred, and in them my big-hearted shipmate vented the bile which more calm-tempered individuals get rid of by a continual pettishness at trivial annoyances.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0406">No one ever saw Toby laugh. </span>
      <span id="f0407">I mean in the hearty abandonment of broad-mouthed mirth. </span>
      <span id="f0408">He did smile sometimes, it is true; and there was a good deal of dry, sarcastic humour about him, which told the more from the imperturbable gravity of his tone and manner.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0409">Latterly I had observed that Toby’s melancholy had greatly increased, and I had frequently seen him since our arrival at the island gazing wistfully upon the shore, when the remainder of the crew would be rioting below. </span>
      <span id="f0410">I was aware that he entertained a cordial detestation of the ship, and believed that, should a fair chance of escape present itself, he would embrace it willingly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0411">But the attempt was so perilous in the place where we then lay, that I supposed myself the only individual on board the ship who was sufficiently reckless to think of it. </span>
      <span id="f0412">In this, however, I was mistaken.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0413">When I perceived Toby leaning, as I have mentioned, against the bulwarks and buried in thought, it struck me at once that the subject of his meditations might be the same as my own. </span>
      <span id="f0414">And if it be so, thought I, is he not the very one of all my shipmates whom I would choose: for the partner of my adventure? </span>
      <span id="f0415">and why should I not have some comrade with me to divide its dangers and alleviate its hardships? </span>
      <span id="f0416">Perhaps I might be obliged to lie concealed among the mountains for weeks. </span>
      <span id="f0417">In such an event what a solace would a companion be?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0418">These thoughts passed rapidly through my mind, and I wondered why I had not before considered the matter in this light. </span>
      <span id="f0419">But it was not too late. </span>
      <span id="f0420">A tap upon the shoulder served to rouse Toby from his reverie; I found him ripe for the enterprise, and a very few words sufficed for a mutual understanding between us. </span>
      <span id="f0421">In an hour’s time we had arranged all the preliminaries, and decided upon our plan of action. </span>
      <span id="f0422">We then ratified our engagement with an affectionate wedding of palms, and to elude suspicion repaired each to his hammock, to spend the last night on board the Dolly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0423">The next day the starboard watch, to which we both belonged, was to be sent ashore on liberty; and, availing ourselves of this opportunity, we determined, as soon after landing as possible, to separate ourselves from the rest of the men without exciting their suspicions, and strike back at once for the mountains. </span>
      <span id="f0424">Seen from the ship, their summits appeared inaccessible, but here and there sloping spurs extended from them almost into the sea, buttressing the lofty elevations with which they were connected, and forming those radiating valleys I have before described. </span>
      <span id="f0425">One of these ridges, which appeared more practicable than the rest, we determined to climb, convinced that it would conduct us to the heights beyond. </span>
      <span id="f0426">Accordingly, we carefully observed its bearings and locality from the ship, so that when ashore we should run no chance of missing it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0427">In all this the leading object we had in view was to seclude ourselves from sight until the departure of the vessel; then to take our chance as to the reception the Nukuheva natives might give us; and after remaining upon the island as long as we found our stay agreeable, to leave it the first favourable opportunity that offered.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>