<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER SEVEN</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0500">CHAPTER SEVEN</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0501">THE OTHER SIDE OF THE MOUNTAIN--DISAPPOINTMENT--INVENTORY OF ARTICLES BROUGHT FROM THE SHIP--DIVISION OF THE STOCK OF BREAD--APPEARANCE OF THE INTERIOR OF THE ISLAND--A DISCOVERY--A RAVINE AND WATERFALLS--A SLEEPLESS NIGHT--FURTHER DISCOVERIES--MY ILLNESS--A MARQUESAN LANDSCAPE</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0502">MY curiosity had been not a little raised with regard to the description of country we should meet on the other side of the mountains; and I had supposed, with Toby, that immediately on gaining the heights we should be enabled to view the large bays of Happar and Typee reposing at our feet on one side, in the same way that Nukuheva lay spread out below on the other. </span>
      <span id="f0503">But here we were disappointed. </span>
      <span id="f0504">Instead of finding the mountain we had ascended sweeping down in the opposite direction into broad and capacious valleys, the land appeared to retain its general elevation, only broken into a series of ridges and inter-vales which so far as the eye could reach stretched away from us, with their precipitous sides covered with the brightest verdure, and waving here and there with the foliage of clumps of woodland; among which, however, we perceived none of those trees upon whose fruit we had relied with such certainty.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0505">This was a most unlooked-for discovery, and one that promised to defeat our plans altogether, for we could not think of descending the mountain on the Nukuheva side in quest of food. </span>
      <span id="f0506">Should we for this purpose be induced to retrace our steps, we should run no small chance of encountering the natives, who in that case, if they did nothing worse to us, would be certain to convey us back to the ship for the sake of the reward in calico and trinkets, which we had no doubt our skipper would hold out to them as an inducement to our capture.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0507">What was to be done? </span>
      <span id="f0508">The Dolly would not sail perhaps for ten days, and how were we to sustain life during this period? </span>
      <span id="f0509">I bitterly repented our improvidence in not providing ourselves, as we easily might have done, with a supply of biscuits. </span>
      <span id="f0510">With a rueful visage I now bethought me of the scanty handful of bread I had stuffed into the bosom of my frock, and felt somewhat desirous to ascertain what part of it had weathered the rather rough usage it had experienced in ascending the mountain. </span>
      <span id="f0511">I accordingly proposed to Toby that we should enter into a joint examination of the various articles we had brought from the ship.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0512">With this intent we seated ourselves upon the grass; and a little curious to see with what kind of judgement my companion had filled his frock--which I remarked seemed about as well lined as my own--I requested him to commence operations by spreading out its contents.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0513">Thrusting his hand, then, into the bosom of this capacious receptacle, he first brought to light about a pound of tobacco, whose component parts still adhered together, the whole outside being covered with soft particles of sea-bread. </span>
      <span id="f0514">Wet and dripping, it had the appearance of having been just recovered from the bottom of the sea. </span>
      <span id="f0515">But I paid slight attention to a substance of so little value to us in our present situation, as soon as I perceived the indications it gave of Toby’s foresight in laying in a supply of food for the expedition.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0516">I eagerly inquired what quantity he had brought with him, when rummaging once more beneath his garment, he produced a small handful of something so soft, pulpy, and discoloured, that for a few moments he was as much puzzled as myself to tell by what possible instrumentality such a villainous compound had become engendered in his bosom. </span>
      <span id="f0517">I can only describe it as a hash of soaked bread and bits of tobacco, brought to a doughy consistency by the united agency of perspiration and rain. </span>
      <span id="f0518">But repulsive as it might otherwise have been, I now regarded it as an invaluable treasure, and proceeded with great care to transfer this paste-like mass to a large leaf which I had plucked from a bush beside me. </span>
      <span id="f0519">Toby informed me that in the morning he had placed two whole biscuits in his bosom, with a view of munching them, should he feel so inclined, during our flight. </span>
      <span id="f0520">These were now reduced to the equivocal substance which I had just placed on the leaf.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0521">Another dive into the frock brought to view some four or five yards of calico print, whose tasteful pattern was rather disfigured by the yellow stains of the tobacco with which it had been brought in contact. </span>
      <span id="f0522">In drawing this calico slowly from his bosom inch by inch, Toby reminded me of a juggler performing the feat of the endless ribbon. </span>
      <span id="f0523">The next cast was a small one, being a sailor’s little ‘ditty bag’, containing needles, thread, and other sewing utensils, then came a razor-case, followed by two or three separate plugs of negro-head, which were fished up from the bottom of the now empty receptacle. </span>
      <span id="f0524">These various matters, being inspected, I produced the few things which I had myself brought.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0525">As might have been anticipated from the state of my companion’s edible supplies, I found my own in a deplorable condition, and diminished to a quantity that would not have formed half a dozen mouthfuls for a hungry man who was partial enough to tobacco not to mind swallowing it. </span>
      <span id="f0526">A few morsels of bread, with a fathom or two of white cotton cloth, and several pounds of choice pigtail, composed the extent of my possessions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0527">Our joint stock of miscellaneous articles were now made up into a compact bundle, which it was agreed we should carry alternately. </span>
      <span id="f0528">But the sorry remains of the biscuit were not to be disposed of so summarily: the precarious circumstances in which we were placed made us regard them as something on which very probably, depended the fate of our adventure. </span>
      <span id="f0529">After a brief discussion, in which we both of us expressed our resolution of not descending into the bay until the ship’s departure, I suggested to my companion that little of it as there was, we should divide the bread into six equal portions, each of which should be a day’s allowance for both of us. </span>
      <span id="f0530">This proposition he assented to; so I took the silk kerchief from my neck, and cutting it with my knife into half a dozen equal pieces, proceeded to make an exact division.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0531">At first, Toby with a degree of fastidiousness that seemed to me ill-timed, was for picking out the minute particles of tobacco with which the spongy mass was mixed; but against this proceeding I protested, as by such an operation we must have greatly diminished its quantity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0532">When the division was accomplished, we found that a day’s allowance for the two was not a great deal more than what a table-spoon might hold. </span>
      <span id="f0533">Each separate portion we immediately rolled up in the bit of silk prepared for it, and joining them all together into a small package, I committed them, with solemn injunctions of fidelity, to the custody of Toby. </span>
      <span id="f0534">For the remainder of that day we resolved to fast, as we had been fortified by a breakfast in the morning; and now starting again to our feet, we looked about us for a shelter during the night, which, from the appearance of the heavens, promised to be a dark and tempestuous one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0535">There was no place near us which would in any way answer our purpose, so turning our backs upon Nukuheva, we commenced exploring the unknown regions which lay upon the other side of the mountain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0536">In this direction, as far as our vision extended, not a sign of life, nor anything that denoted even the transient residence of man, could be seen. </span>
      <span id="f0537">The whole landscape seemed one unbroken solitude, the interior of the island having apparently been untenanted since the morning of the creation; and as we advanced through this wilderness, our voices sounded strangely in our ears, as though human accents had never before disturbed the fearful silence of the place, interrupted only by the low murmurings of distant waterfalls.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0538">Our disappointment, however, in not finding the various fruits with which we had intended to regale ourselves during our stay in these wilds, was a good deal lessened by the consideration that from this very circumstance we should be much less exposed to a casual meeting with the savage tribes about us, who we knew always dwelt beneath the shadows of those trees which supplied them with food.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0539">We wandered along, casting eager glances into every bush we passed, until just as we had succeeded in mounting one of the many ridges that intersected the ground, I saw in the grass before me something like an indistinctly traced footpath, which appeared to lead along the top of the ridge, and to descend--with it into a deep ravine about half a mile in advance of us.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0540">Robinson Crusoe could not have been more startled at the footprint in the sand than we were at this unwelcome discovery. </span>
      <span id="f0541">My first impulse was to make as rapid a retreat as possible, and bend our steps in some other direction; but our curiosity to see whither this path might lead, prompted us to pursue it. </span>
      <span id="f0542">So on we went, the track becoming more and more visible the farther we proceeded, until it conducted us to the verge of the ravine, where it abruptly terminated.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0543">‘And so,’ said Toby, peering down into the chasm, ‘everyone that travels this path takes a jump here, eh?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0544">‘Not so,’ said I, ‘for I think they might manage to descend without it; what say you,--shall we attempt the feat?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0545">‘And what, in the name of caves and coal-holes, do you expect to find at the bottom of that gulf but a broken neck--why it looks blacker than our ship’s hold, and the roar of those waterfalls down there would batter one’s brains to pieces.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0546">‘Oh, no, Toby,’ I exclaimed, laughing; ‘but there’s something to be seen here, that’s plain, or there would have been no path, and I am resolved to find out what it is.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0547">‘I will tell you what, my pleasant fellow,’ rejoined Toby quickly, ‘if you are going to pry into everything you meet with here that excites your curiosity, you will marvellously soon get knocked on the head; to a dead certainty you will come bang upon a party of these savages in the midst of your discovery-makings, and I doubt whether such an event would particularly delight you, just take my advice for once, and let us ‘bout ship and steer in some other direction; besides, it’s getting late and we ought to be mooring ourselves for the night.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0548">‘That is just the thing I have been driving at,’ replied I; ‘and I am thinking that this ravine will exactly answer our purpose, for it is roomy, secluded, well watered, and may shelter us from the weather.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0549">‘Aye, and from sleep too, and by the same token will give us sore throats, and rheumatisms into the bargain,’ cried Toby, with evident dislike at the idea.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0550">‘Oh, very well then, my lad,’ said I, ‘since you will not accompany me, here I go alone. </span>
      <span id="f0551">You will see me in the morning;’ and advancing to the edge of the cliff upon which we had been standing, I proceeded to lower myself down by the tangled roots which clustered about all the crevices of the rock. </span>
      <span id="f0552">As I had anticipated, Toby, in spite of his previous remonstrances, followed my example, and dropping himself with the activity of a squirrel from point to point, he quickly outstripped me and effected a landing at the bottom before I had accomplished two-thirds of the descent.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0553">The sight that now greeted us was one that will ever be vividly impressed upon my mind. </span>
      <span id="f0554">Five foaming streams, rushing through as many gorges, and swelled and turbid by the recent rains, united together in one mad plunge of nearly eighty feet, and fell with wild uproar into a deep black pool scooped out of the gloomy looking rocks that lay piled around, and thence in one collected body dashed down a narrow sloping channel which seemed to penetrate into the very bowels of the earth. </span>
      <span id="f0555">Overhead, vast roots of trees hung down from the sides of the ravine dripping with moisture, and trembling with the concussions produced by the fall. </span>
      <span id="f0556">It was now sunset, and the feeble uncertain light that found its way into these caverns and woody depths heightened their strange appearance, and reminded us that in a short time we should find ourselves in utter darkness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0557">As soon as I had satisfied my curiosity by gazing at this scene, I fell to wondering how it was that what we had taken for a path should have conducted us to so singular a place, and began to suspect that after all I might have been deceived in supposing it to have been a trick formed by the islanders. </span>
      <span id="f0558">This was rather an agreeable reflection than otherwise, for it diminished our dread of accidentally meeting with any of them, and I came to the conclusion that perhaps we could not have selected a more secure hiding-place than this very spot we had so accidentally hit upon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0559">Toby agreed with me in this view of the matter, and we immediately began gathering together the limbs of trees which lay scattered about, with the view of constructing a temporary hut for the night. </span>
      <span id="f0560">This we were obliged to build close to the foot of the cataract, for the current of water extended very nearly to the sides of the gorge. </span>
      <span id="f0561">The few moments of light that remained we employed in covering our hut with a species of broad-bladed grass that grew in every fissure of the ravine. </span>
      <span id="f0562">Our hut, if it deserved to be called one, consisted of six or eight of the straightest branches we could find laid obliquely against the steep wall of rock, with their lower ends within a foot of the stream. </span>
      <span id="f0563">Into the space thus covered over we managed to crawl, and dispose our wearied bodies as best we could.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0564">Shall I ever forget that horrid night! </span>
      <span id="f0565">As for poor Toby, I could scarcely get a word out of him. </span>
      <span id="f0566">It would have been some consolation to have heard his voice, but he lay shivering the live-long night like a man afflicted with the palsy, with his knees drawn up to his head, while his back was supported against the dripping side of the rock. </span>
      <span id="f0567">During this wretched night there seemed nothing wanting to complete the perfect misery of our condition. </span>
      <span id="f0568">The rain descended in such torrents that our poor shelter proved a mere mockery. </span>
      <span id="f0569">In vain did I try to elude the incessant streams that poured upon me; by protecting one part I only exposed another, and the water was continually finding some new opening through which to drench us.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0570">I have had many a ducking in the course of my life, and in general cared little about it; but the accumulated horrors of that night, the deathlike coldness of the place, the appalling darkness and the dismal sense of our forlorn condition, almost unmanned me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0571">It will not be doubted that the next morning we were early risers, and as soon as I could catch the faintest glimpse of anything like daylight I shook my companion by the arm, and told him it was sunrise. </span>
      <span id="f0572">Poor Toby lifted up his head, and after a moment’s pause said, in a husky voice, ‘Then, shipmate, my toplights have gone out, for it appears darker now with my eyes open that it did when they were shut.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0573">‘Nonsense!’ exclaimed I; ‘You are not awake yet.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0574">‘Awake!’ roared Toby in a rage, ‘awake! </span>
      <span id="f0575">You mean to insinuate I’ve been asleep, do you? </span>
      <span id="f0576">It is an insult to a man to suppose he could sleep in such an infernal place as this.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0577">By the time I had apologized to my friend for having misconstrued his silence, it had become somewhat more light, and we crawled out of our lair. </span>
      <span id="f0578">The rain had ceased, but everything around us was dripping with moisture. </span>
      <span id="f0579">We stripped off our saturated garments, and wrung them as dry as we could. </span>
      <span id="f0580">We contrived to make the blood circulate in our benumbed limbs by rubbing them vigorously with our hands; and after performing our ablutions in the stream, and putting on our still wet clothes, we began to think it advisable to break our long fast, it being now twenty-four hours since we had tasted food.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0581">Accordingly our day’s ration was brought out, and seating ourselves on a detached fragment of rock, we proceeded to discuss it. </span>
      <span id="f0582">First we divided it into two equal portions, and carefully rolling one of them up for our evening’s repast, divided the remainder again as equally as possible, and then drew lots for the first choice. </span>
      <span id="f0583">I could have placed the morsel that fell to my share upon the tip of my finger; but notwithstanding this I took care that it should be full ten minutes before I had swallowed the last crumb. </span>
      <span id="f0584">What a true saying it is that ‘appetite furnishes the best sauce.’ There was a flavour and a relish to this small particle of food that under other circumstances it would have been impossible for the most delicate viands to have imparted. </span>
      <span id="f0585">A copious draught of the pure water which flowed at our feet served to complete the meal, and after it we rose sensibly refreshed, and prepared for whatever might befall us.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0586">We now carefully examined the chasm in which we had passed the night. </span>
      <span id="f0587">We crossed the stream, and gaining the further side of the pool I have mentioned, discovered proofs that the spot must have been visited by some one but a short time previous to our arrival. </span>
      <span id="f0588">Further observation convinced us that it had been regularly frequented, and, as we afterwards conjectured from particular indications, for the purpose of obtaining a certain root, from which the natives obtained a kind of ointment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0589">These discoveries immediately determined us to abandon a place which had presented no inducement for us to remain, except the promise of security; and as we looked about us for the means of ascending again into the upper regions, we at last found a practicable part of the rock, and half an hour’s toil carried us to the summit of the same cliff from which the preceding evening we had descended.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0590">I now proposed to Toby that instead of rambling about the island, exposing ourselves to discovery at every turn, we should select some place as our fixed abode for as long a period as our food should hold out, build ourselves a comfortable hut, and be as prudent and circumspect as possible. </span>
      <span id="f0591">To all this my companion assented, and we at once set about carrying the plan into execution.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0592">With this view, after exploring without success a little glen near us, we crossed several of the ridges of which I have before spoken; and about noon found ourselves ascending a long and gradually rising slope, but still without having discovered any place adapted to our purpose. </span>
      <span id="f0593">Low and heavy clouds betokened an approaching storm, and we hurried on to gain a covert in a clump of thick bushes, which appeared to terminate the long ascent. </span>
      <span id="f0594">We threw ourselves under the lee of these bushes, and pulling up the long grass that grew around, covered ourselves completely with it, and awaited the shower.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0595">But it did not come as soon as we had expected, and before many minutes my companion was fast asleep, and I was rapidly falling into the same state of happy forgetfulness. </span>
      <span id="f0596">Just at this juncture, however, down came the rain with the violence that put all thoughts of slumber to flight. </span>
      <span id="f0597">Although in some measure sheltered, our clothes soon became as wet as ever; this, after all the trouble we had taken to dry them, was provoking enough: but there was no help for it; and I recommend all adventurous youths who abandon vessels in romantic islands during the rainy season to provide themselves with umbrellas.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0598">After an hour or so the shower passed away. </span>
      <span id="f0599">My companion slept through it all, or at least appeared so to do; and now that it was over I had not the heart to awaken him. </span>
      <span id="f0600">As I lay on my back completely shrouded with verdure, the leafy branches drooping over me, my limbs buried in grass, I could not avoid comparing our situation with that of the interesting babes in the wood. </span>
      <span id="f0601">Poor little sufferers!--no wonder their constitutions broke down under the hardships to which they were exposed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0602">During the hour or two spent under the shelter of these bushes, I began to feel symptoms which I at once attributed to the exposure of the preceding night. </span>
      <span id="f0603">Cold shiverings and a burning fever succeeded one another at intervals, while one of my legs was swelled to such a degree, and pained me so acutely, that I half suspected I had been bitten by some venomous reptile, the congenial inhabitant of the chasm from which we had lately emerged. </span>
      <span id="f0604">I may here remark by the way--what I subsequently gleamed--that all the islands of Polynesia enjoy the reputation, in common with the Hibernian isle, of being free from the presence of any vipers; though whether Saint Patrick ever visited them, is a question I shall not attempt to decide.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0605">As the feverish sensation increased upon me I tossed about, still unwilling to disturb my slumbering companion, from whose side I removed two or three yards. </span>
      <span id="f0606">I chanced to push aside a branch, and by so doing suddenly disclosed to my view a scene which even now I can recall with all the vividness of the first impression. </span>
      <span id="f0607">Had a glimpse of the gardens of Paradise been revealed to me, I could scarcely have been more ravished with the sight.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0608">From the spot where I lay transfixed with surprise and delight, I looked straight down into the bosom of a valley, which swept away in long wavy undulations to the blue waters in the distance. </span>
      <span id="f0609">Midway towards the sea, and peering here and there amidst the foliage, might be seen the palmetto-thatched houses of its inhabitants glistening in the sun that had bleached them to a dazzling whiteness. </span>
      <span id="f0610">The vale was more than three leagues in length, and about a mile across at its greatest width.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0611">On either side it appeared hemmed in by steep and green acclivities, which, uniting near the spot where I lay, formed an abrupt and semicircular termination of grassy cliffs and precipices hundreds of feet in height, over which flowed numberless small cascades. </span>
      <span id="f0612">But the crowning beauty of the prospect was its universal verdure; and in this indeed consists, I believe, the peculiar charm of every Polynesian landscape. </span>
      <span id="f0613">Everywhere below me, from the base of the precipice upon whose very verge I had been unconsciously reposing, the surface of the vale presented a mass of foliage, spread with such rich profusion that it was impossible to determine of what description of trees it consisted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0614">But perhaps there was nothing about the scenery I beheld more impressive than those silent cascades, whose slender threads of water, after leaping down the steep cliffs, were lost amidst the rich herbage of the valley.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0615">Over all the landscape there reigned the most hushed repose, which I almost feared to break, lest, like the enchanted gardens in the fairy tale, a single syllable might dissolve the spell. </span>
      <span id="f0616">For a long time, forgetful alike of my own situation, and the vicinity of my still slumbering companion, I remained gazing around me, hardly able to comprehend by what means I had thus suddenly been made a spectator of such a scene.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>