<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
      <p>
      <span id="f00617">CHAPTER EIGHT</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00618">THE IMPORTANT QUESTION, TYPEE OR HAPPAR?--A WILD GOOSE CHASE--MY SUFFERINGS--DISHEARTENING SITUATION--A NIGHT IN A RAVINE--MORNING MEAL--HAPPY IDEA OF TOBY--JOURNEY TOWARDS THE VALLEY</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00619">RECOVERING from my astonishment at the beautiful scene before me, I quickly awakened Toby, and informed him of the discovery I had made. </span>
      <span id="f00620">Together we now repaired to the border of the precipice, and my companion’s admiration was equal to my own. </span>
      <span id="f00621">A little reflection, however, abated our surprise at coming so unexpectedly upon this valley, since the large vales of Happar and Typee, lying upon this side of Nukuheva, and extending a considerable distance from the sea towards the interior, must necessarily terminate somewhere about this point.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00622">The question now was as to which of those two places we were looking down upon. </span>
      <span id="f00623">Toby insisted that it was the abode of the Happar, and I that it was tenanted by their enemies the ferocious Typees. </span>
      <span id="f00624">To be sure I was not entirely convinced by my own arguments, but Toby’s proposition to descend at once into the valley, and partake of the hospitality of its inmates, seemed to me to be risking so much upon the strength of a mere supposition, that I resolved to oppose it until we had more evidence to proceed upon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00625">The point was one of vital importance, as the natives of Happar were not only at peace with Nukuheva, but cultivated with its inhabitants the most friendly relations, and enjoyed besides a reputation for gentleness and humanity which led us to expect from them, if not a cordial reception, at least a shelter during the short period we should remain in their territory.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00626">On the other hand, the very name of Typee struck a panic into my heart which I did not attempt to disguise. </span>
      <span id="f00627">The thought of voluntarily throwing ourselves into the hands of these cruel savages, seemed to me an act of mere madness; and almost equally so the idea of venturing into the valley, uncertain by which of these two tribes it was inhabited. </span>
      <span id="f00628">That the vale at our feet was tenanted by one of them, was a point that appeared to us past all doubt, since we knew that they resided in this quarter, although our information did not enlighten us further.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00629">My companion, however, incapable of resisting the tempting prospect which the place held out of an abundant supply of food and other means of enjoyment, still clung to his own inconsiderate view of the subject, nor could all my reasoning shake it. </span>
      <span id="f00630">When I reminded him that it was impossible for either of us to know anything with certainty, and when I dwelt upon the horrible fate we should encounter were we rashly to descend into the valley, and discover too late the error we had committed, he replied by detailing all the evils of our present condition, and the sufferings we must undergo should we continue to remain where we then were.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00631">Anxious to draw him away from the subject, if possible--for I saw that it would be in vain to attempt changing his mind--I directed his attention to a long bright unwooded tract of land which, sweeping down from the elevations in the interior, descended into the valley before us. </span>
      <span id="f00632">I then suggested to him that beyond this ridge might lie a capacious and untenanted valley, abounding with all manner of delicious fruits; for I had heard that there were several such upon the island, and proposed that we should endeavour to reach it, and if we found our expectations realized we should at once take refuge in it and remain there as long as we pleased.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00633">He acquiesced in the suggestion; and we immediately, therefore, began surveying the country lying before us, with a view of determining upon the best route for us to pursue; but it presented little choice, the whole interval being broken into steep ridges, divided by dark ravines, extending in parallel lines at right angles to our direct course. </span>
      <span id="f00634">All these we would be obliged to cross before we could hope to arrive at our destination.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00635">A weary journey! </span>
      <span id="f00636">But we decided to undertake it, though, for my own part, I felt little prepared to encounter its fatigues, shivering and burning by turns with the ague and fever; for I know not how else to describe the alternate sensations I experienced, and suffering not a little from the lameness which afflicted me. </span>
      <span id="f00637">Added to this was the faintness consequent on our meagre diet--a calamity in which Toby participated to the same extent as myself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00638">These circumstances, however, only augmented my anxiety to reach a place which promised us plenty and repose, before I should be reduced to a state which would render me altogether unable to perform the journey. </span>
      <span id="f00639">Accordingly we now commenced it by descending the almost perpendicular side of a steep and narrow gorge, bristling with a thick growth of reeds. </span>
      <span id="f00640">Here there was but one mode for us to adopt. </span>
      <span id="f00641">We seated ourselves upon the ground, and guided our descent by catching at the canes in our path. </span>
      <span id="f00642">This velocity with which we thus slid down the side of the ravine soon brought us to a point where we could use our feet, and in a short time we arrived at the edge of the torrent, which rolled impetuously along the bed of the chasm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00643">After taking a refreshing draught from the water of the stream, we addressed ourselves to a much more difficult undertaking than the last. </span>
      <span id="f00644">Every foot of our late descent had to be regained in ascending the opposite side of the gorge--an operation rendered the less agreeable from the consideration that in these perpendicular episodes we did not progress a hundred yards on our journey. </span>
      <span id="f00645">But, ungrateful as the task was, we set about it with exemplary patience, and after a snail-like progress of an hour or more, had scaled perhaps one half of the distance, when the fever which had left me for a while returned with such violence, and accompanied by so raging a thirst, that it required all the entreaties of Toby to prevent me from losing all the fruits of my late exertion, by precipitating myself madly down the cliffs we had just climbed, in quest of the water which flowed so temptingly at their base. </span>
      <span id="f00646">At the moment all my hopes and fears appeared to be merged in this one desire, careless of the consequences that might result from its gratification. </span>
      <span id="f00647">I am aware of no feeling, either of pleasure or of pain, that so completely deprives one of an power to resist its impulses, as this same raging thirst.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00648">Toby earnestly conjured me to continue the ascent, assuring me that a little more exertion would bring us to the summit, and that then in less than five minutes we should find ourselves at the brink of the stream, which must necessarily flow on the other side of the ridge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00649">‘Do not,’ he exclaimed, ‘turn back, now that we have proceeded thus far; for I tell you that neither of us will have the courage to repeat the attempt, if once more we find ourselves looking up to where we now are from the bottom of these rocks!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00650">I was not yet so perfectly beside myself as to be heedless of these representations, and therefore toiled on, ineffectually endeavouring to appease the thirst which consumed me, by thinking that in a short time I should be able to gratify it to my heart’s content.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00651">At last we gained the top of the second elevation, the loftiest of those I have described as extending in parallel lines between us and the valley we desired to reach. </span>
      <span id="f00652">It commanded a view of the whole intervening distance; and, discouraged as I was by other circumstances, this prospect plunged me into the very depths of despair. </span>
      <span id="f00653">Nothing but dark and fearful chasms, separated by sharp-crested and perpendicular ridges as far as the eye could reach. </span>
      <span id="f00654">Could we have stepped from summit to summit of these steep but narrow elevations we could easily have accomplished the distance; but we must penetrate to the bottom of every yawning gulf, and scale in succession every one of the eminences before us. </span>
      <span id="f00655">Even Toby, although not suffering as I did, was not proof against the disheartening influences of the sight.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00656">But we did not long stand to contemplate it, impatient as I was to reach the waters of the torrent which flowed beneath us. </span>
      <span id="f00657">With an insensibility to danger which I cannot call to mind without shuddering, we threw ourselves down the depths of the ravine, startling its savage solitudes with the echoes produced by the falling fragments of rock we every moment dislodged from their places, careless of the insecurity of our footing, and reckless whether the slight roots and twigs we clutched at sustained us for the while, or treacherously yielded to our grasp. </span>
      <span id="f00658">For my own part, I scarcely knew whether I was helplessly falling from the heights above, or whether the fearful rapidity with which I descended was an act of my own volition.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00659">In a few minutes we reached the foot of the gorge, and kneeling upon a small ledge of dripping rocks, I bent over to the stream. </span>
      <span id="f00660">What a delicious sensation was I now to experience! </span>
      <span id="f00661">I paused for a second to concentrate all my capabilities of enjoyment, and then immerged my lips in the clear element before me. </span>
      <span id="f00662">Had the apples of Sodom turned to ashes in my mouth, I could not have felt a more startling revulsion. </span>
      <span id="f00663">A single drop of the cold fluid seemed to freeze every drop of blood in my body; the fever that had been burning in my veins gave place on the instant to death-like chills, which shook me one after another like so many shocks of electricity, while the perspiration produced by my late violent exertions congealed in icy beads upon my forehead. </span>
      <span id="f00664">My thirst was gone, and I fairly loathed the water. </span>
      <span id="f00665">Starting to my feet, the sight of those dank rocks, oozing forth moisture at every crevice, and the dark stream shooting along its dismal channel, sent fresh chills through my shivering frame, and I felt as uncontrollable a desire to climb up towards the genial sunlight as I before had to descend the ravine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00666">After two hours’ perilous exertions we stood upon the summit of another ridge, and it was with difficulty I could bring myself to believe that we had ever penetrated the black and yawning chasm which then gaped at our feet. </span>
      <span id="f00667">Again we gazed upon the prospect which the height commanded, but it was just as depressing as the one which had before met our eyes. </span>
      <span id="f00668">I now felt that in our present situation it was in vain for us to think of ever overcoming the obstacles in our way, and I gave up all thoughts of reaching the vale which lay beyond this series of impediments; while at the same time I could not devise any scheme to extricate ourselves from the difficulties in which we were involved.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00669">The remotest idea of returning to Nukuheva, unless assured of our vessel’s departure, never once entered my mind, and indeed it was questionable whether we could have succeeded in reaching it, divided as we were from the bay by a distance we could not compute, and perplexed too in our remembrance of localities by our recent wanderings. </span>
      <span id="f00670">Besides, it was unendurable the thought of retracing our steps and rendering all our painful exertions of no avail.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00671">There is scarcely anything when a man is in difficulties that he is more disposed to look upon with abhorrence than a rightabout retrograde movement--a systematic going over of the already trodden ground: and especially if he has a love of adventure, such a course appears indescribably repulsive, so long as there remains the least hope to be derived from braving untried difficulties.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00672">It was this feeling that prompted us to descend the opposite side of the elevation we had just scaled, although with what definite object in view it would have been impossible for either of us to tell.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00673">Without exchanging a syllable upon the subject, Toby and myself simultaneously renounced the design which had lured us thus far--perceiving in each other’s countenances that desponding expression which speaks more eloquently than words.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00674">Together we stood towards the close of this weary day in the cavity of the third gorge we had entered, wholly incapacitated for any further exertion, until restored to some degree of strength by food and repose.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00675">We seated ourselves upon the least uncomfortable spot we could select, and Toby produced from the bosom of his frock the sacred package. </span>
      <span id="f00676">In silence we partook of the small morsel of refreshment that had been left from the morning’s repast, and without once proposing to violate the sanctity of our engagement with respect to the remainder, we rose to our feet, and proceeded to construct some sort of shelter under which we might obtain the sleep we so greatly needed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00677">Fortunately the spot was better adapted to our purpose than the one in which we had passed the last wretched night. </span>
      <span id="f00678">We cleared away the tall reeds from the small but almost level bit of ground, and twisted them into a low basket-like hut, which we covered with a profusion of long thick leaves, gathered from a tree near at hand. </span>
      <span id="f00679">We disposed them thickly all around, reserving only a slight opening that barely permitted us to crawl under the shelter we had thus obtained.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00680">These deep recesses, though protected from the winds that assail the summits of their lofty sides, are damp and chill to a degree that one would hardly anticipate in such a climate; and being unprovided with anything but our woollen frocks and thin duck trousers to resist the cold of the place, we were the more solicitous to render our habitation for the night as comfortable as we could. </span>
      <span id="f00681">Accordingly, in addition to what we had already done, we plucked down all the leaves within our reach and threw them in a heap over our little hut, into which we now crept, raking after us a reserved supply to form our couch.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00682">That night nothing but the pain I suffered prevented me from sleeping most refreshingly. </span>
      <span id="f00683">As it was, I caught two or three naps, while Toby slept away at my side as soundly as though he had been sandwiched between two Holland sheets. </span>
      <span id="f00684">Luckily it did not rain, and we were preserved from the misery which a heavy shower would have occasioned us. </span>
      <span id="f00685">In the morning I was awakened by the sonorous voice of my companion ringing in my ears and bidding me rise. </span>
      <span id="f00686">I crawled out from our heap of leaves, and was astonished at the change which a good night’s rest had wrought in his appearance. </span>
      <span id="f00687">He was as blithe and joyous as a young bird, and was staying the keenness of his morning’s appetite by chewing the soft bark of a delicate branch he held in his hand, and he recommended the like to me as an admirable antidote against the gnawings of hunger.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00688">For my own part, though feeling materially better than I had done the preceding evening, I could not look at the limb that had pained me so violently at intervals during the last twenty-four hours, without experiencing a sense of alarm that I strove in vain to shake off. </span>
      <span id="f00689">Unwilling to disturb the flow of my comrade’s spirits, I managed to stifle the complaints to which I might otherwise have given vent, and calling upon him good-humouredly to speed our banquet, I prepared myself for it by washing in the stream. </span>
      <span id="f00690">This operation concluded, we swallowed, or rather absorbed, by a peculiar kind of slow sucking process, our respective morsels of nourishment, and then entered into a discussion as to the steps is was necessary for us to pursue.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00691">‘What’s to be done now?’ inquired I, rather dolefully.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00692">‘Descend into that same valley we descried yesterday.’ rejoined Toby, with a rapidity and loudness of utterance that almost led me to suspect he had been slyly devouring the broadside of an ox in some of the adjoining thickets. </span>
      <span id="f00693">‘What else,’ he continued, ‘remains for us to do but that, to be sure? </span>
      <span id="f00694">Why, we shall both starve to a certainty if we remain here; and as to your fears of those Typees--depend upon it, it is all nonsense.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00695">‘It is impossible that the inhabitants of such a lovely place as we saw can be anything else but good fellows; and if you choose rather to perish with hunger in one of these soppy caverns, I for one prefer to chance a bold descent into the valley, and risk the consequences’.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00696">‘And who is to pilot us thither,’ I asked, ‘even if we should decide upon the measure you propose? </span>
      <span id="f00697">Are we to go again up and down those precipices that we crossed yesterday, until we reach the place we started from, and then take a flying leap from the cliffs to the valley?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00698">‘Faith, I didn’t think of that,’ said Toby; ‘sure enough, both sides of the valley appeared to be hemmed in by precipices, didn’t they?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00699">‘Yes,’ answered I, ‘as steep as the sides of a line-of-battle ship, and about a hundred times as high.’ My companion sank his head upon his breast, and remained for a while in deep thought. </span>
      <span id="f00700">Suddenly he sprang to his feet, while his eyes lighted up with that gleam of intelligence that marks the presence of some bright idea.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00701">‘Yes, yes,’ he exclaimed; ‘the streams all run in the same direction, and must necessarily flow into the valley before they reach the sea; all we have to do is just to follow this stream, and sooner or later it will lead us into the vale.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00702">‘You are right, Toby,’ I exclaimed, ‘you are right; it must conduct us thither, and quickly too; for, see with what a steep inclination the water descends.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00703">‘It does, indeed,’ burst forth my companion, overjoyed at my verification of his theory, ‘it does indeed; why, it is as plain as a pike-staff. </span>
      <span id="f00704">Let us proceed at once; come, throw away all those stupid ideas about the Typees, and hurrah for the lovely valley of the Happars.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00705">‘You will have it to be Happar, I see, my dear fellow; pray Heaven you may not find yourself deceived,’ observed I, with a shake of my head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f00706">‘Amen to all that, and much more,’ shouted Toby, rushing forward; ‘but Happar it is, for nothing else than Happar can it be. </span>
      <span id="f00707">So glorious a valley--such forests of bread-fruit trees--such groves of cocoanut--such wilderness of guava-bushes! </span>
      <span id="f00708">Ah! </span>
      <span id="f00709">shipmate! </span>
      <span id="f00710">don’t linger behind: in the name of all delightful fruits, I am dying to be at them. </span>
      <span id="f00711">Come on, come on; shove ahead, there’s a lively lad; never mind the rocks; kick them out of the way, as I do; and tomorrow, old fellow, take my word for it, we shall be in clover. </span>
      <span id="f00712">Come on;’ and so saying, he dashed along the ravine like a madman, forgetting my inability to keep up with him. </span>
      <span id="f00713">In a few minutes, however, the exuberance of his spirits abated, and, pausing for a while, he permitted me to overtake him.</span>
      </p>
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>