<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER NINE</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0714">CHAPTER NINE</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0715">PERILOUS PASSAGE OF THE RAVINE--DESCENT INTO THE VALLEY</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0716">The fearless confidence of Toby was contagious, and I began to adopt the Happar side of the question. </span>
      <span id="f0717">I could not, however, overcome a certain feeling of trepidation as we made our way along these gloomy solitudes. </span>
      <span id="f0718">Our progress, at first comparatively easy, became more and more difficult. </span>
      <span id="f0719">The bed of the watercourse was covered with fragments of broken rocks, which had fallen from above, offering so many obstructions to the course of the rapid stream, which vexed and fretted about them,--forming at intervals small waterfalls, pouring over into deep basins, or splashing wildly upon heaps of stones.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0720">From the narrowness of the gorge, and the steepness of its sides, there was no mode of advancing but by wading through the water; stumbling every moment over the impediments which lay hidden under its surface, or tripping against the huge roots of trees. </span>
      <span id="f0721">But the most annoying hindrance we encountered was from a multitude of crooked boughs, which, shooting out almost horizontally from the sides of the chasm, twisted themselves together in fantastic masses almost to the surface of the stream, affording us no passage except under the low arches which they formed. </span>
      <span id="f0722">Under these we were obliged to crawl on our hands and feet, sliding along the oozy surface of the rocks, or slipping into the deep pools, and with scarce light enough to guide us. </span>
      <span id="f0723">Occasionally we would strike our heads against some projecting limb of a tree; and while imprudently engaged in rubbing the injured part, would fall sprawling amongst flinty fragments, cutting and bruising ourselves, whilst the unpitying waters flowed over our prostrate bodies. </span>
      <span id="f0724">Belzoni, worming himself through the subterranean passages of the Egyptian catacombs, could not have met with great impediments than those we here encountered. </span>
      <span id="f0725">But we struggled against them manfully, well knowing our only hope lay in advancing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0726">Towards sunset we halted at a spot where we made preparations for passing the night. </span>
      <span id="f0727">Here we constructed a hut, in much the same way as before, and crawling into it, endeavoured to forget our sufferings. </span>
      <span id="f0728">My companion, I believe, slept pretty soundly; but at day break, when we rolled out of our dwelling, I felt nearly disqualified for any further efforts. </span>
      <span id="f0729">Toby prescribed as a remedy for my illness the contents of one of our little silk packages, to be taken at once in a single dose. </span>
      <span id="f0730">To this species of medical treatment, however, I would by no means accede, much as he insisted upon it; and so we partook of our usual morsel, and silently resumed our journey. </span>
      <span id="f0731">It was now the fourth day since we left Nukuheva, and the gnawings of hunger became painfully acute. </span>
      <span id="f0732">We were fain to pacify them by chewing the tender bark of roots and twigs, which, if they did not afford us nourishment, were at least sweet and pleasant to the taste.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0733">Our progress along the steep watercourse was necessarily slow, and by noon we had not advanced more than a mile. </span>
      <span id="f0734">It was somewhere near this part of the day that the noise of falling waters, which we had faintly caught in the early morning, became more distinct; and it was not long before we were arrested by a rocky precipice of nearly a hundred feet in depth, that extended all across the channel, and over which the wild stream poured in an unbroken leap. </span>
      <span id="f0735">On each hand the walls of the ravine presented their overhanging sides both above and below the fall, affording no means whatever of avoiding the cataract by taking a circuit round it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0736">‘What’s to be done now, Toby?’ said I.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0737">‘Why,’ rejoined he, ‘as we cannot retreat, I suppose we must keep shoving along.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0738">‘Very true, my dear Toby; but how do you purpose accomplishing that desirable object?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0739">‘By jumping from the top of the fall, if there be no other way,’ unhesitatingly replied my companion: ‘it will be much the quickest way of descent; but as you are not quite as active as I am, we will try some other way.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0740">And, so saying, he crept cautiously along and peered over into the abyss, while I remained wondering by what possible means we could overcome this apparently insuperable obstruction. </span>
      <span id="f0741">As soon as my companion had completed his survey, I eagerly inquired the result.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0742">‘The result of my observations you wish to know, do you?’ began Toby, deliberately, with one of his odd looks: ‘well, my lad, the result of my observations is very quickly imparted. </span>
      <span id="f0743">It is at present uncertain which of our two necks will have the honour to be broken first; but about a hundred to one would be a fair bet in favour of the man who takes the first jump.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0744">‘Then it is an impossible thing, is it?’ inquired I gloomily.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0745">‘No, shipmate; on the contrary, it is the easiest thing in life: the only awkward point is the sort of usage which our unhappy limbs may receive when we arrive at the bottom, and what sort of travelling trim we shall be in afterwards. </span>
      <span id="f0746">But follow me now, and I will show you the only chance we have.’ With this he conducted me to the verge of the cataract, and pointed along the side of the ravine to a number of curious looking roots, some three or four inches in thickness, and several feet long, which, after twisting among the fissures of the rock, shot perpendicularly from it and ran tapering to a point in the air, hanging over the gulf like so many dark icicles. </span>
      <span id="f0747">They covered nearly the entire surface of one side of the gorge, the lowest of them reaching even to the water. </span>
      <span id="f0748">Many were moss grown and decayed, with their extremities snapped short off, and those in the immediate vicinity of the fall were slippery with moisture.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0749">Toby’s scheme, and it was a desperate one, was to entrust ourselves to these treacherous-looking roots, and by slipping down from one to another to gain the bottom.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0750">‘Are you ready to venture it?’ asked Toby, looking at me earnestly but without saying a word as to the practicability of the plan.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0751">‘I am,’ was my reply; for I saw it was our only resource if we wished to advance, and as for retreating, all thoughts of that sort had been long abandoned.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0752">After I had signified my assent, Toby, without uttering a a single word, crawled along the dripping ledge until he gained a point from whence he could just reach one of the largest of the pendant roots; he shook it--it quivered in his grasp, and when he let it go it twanged in the air like a strong, wire sharply struck. </span>
      <span id="f0753">Satisfied by his scrutiny, my light limbed companion swung himself nimbly upon it, and twisting his legs round it in sailor fashion, slipped down eight or ten feet, where his weight gave it a motion not un-like that of a pendulum. </span>
      <span id="f0754">He could not venture to descend any further; so holding on with one hand, he with the other shook one by one all the slender roots around him, and at last, finding one which he thought trustworthy, shifted him self to it and continued his downward progress.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0755">So far so well; but I could not avoid comparing my heavier frame and disabled condition with his light figure and remarkable activity; but there was no help for it, and in less than a minute’s time I was swinging directly over his head. </span>
      <span id="f0756">As soon as his upturned eyes caught a glimpse of me, he exclaimed in his usual dry tone, for the danger did not seem to daunt him in the least, ‘Mate, do me the kindness not to fall until I get out of your way;’ and then swinging himself more on one side, he continued his descent. </span>
      <span id="f0757">In the mean time I cautiously transferred myself from the limb down which I had been slipping to a couple of others that were near it, deeming two strings to my bow better than one, and taking care to test their strength before I trusted my weight to them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0758">On arriving towards the end of the second stage in this vertical journey, and shaking the long roots which were round me, to my consternation they snapped off one after another like so many pipe stems, and fell in fragments against the side of the gulf, splashing at last into the waters beneath.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0759">As one after another the treacherous roots yielded to my grasp, and fell into the torrent, my heart sunk within me. </span>
      <span id="f0760">The branches on which I was suspended over the yawning chasm swang to and fro in the air, and I expected them every moment to snap in twain. </span>
      <span id="f0761">Appalled at the dreadful fate that menaced me, I clutched frantically at the only large root which remained near me, but in vain; I could not reach it, though my fingers were within a few inches of it. </span>
      <span id="f0762">Again and again I tried to reach it, until at length, maddened with the thought of my situation, I swayed myself violently by striking my foot against the side of the rock, and at the instant that I approached the large root caught desperately at it, and transferred myself to it. </span>
      <span id="f0763">It vibrated violently under the sudden weight, but fortunately did not give way.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0764">My brain grew dizzy with the idea of the frightful risk I had just run, and I involuntarily closed my eyes to shut out the view of the depth beneath me. </span>
      <span id="f0765">For the instant I was safe, and I uttered a devout ejaculation of thanksgiving for my escape.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0766">‘Pretty well done,’ shouted Toby underneath me; ‘you are nimbler than I thought you to be--hopping about up there from root to root like any young squirrel. </span>
      <span id="f0767">As soon as you have diverted yourself sufficiently, I would advise you to proceed.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0768">‘Aye, aye, Toby, all in good time: two or three more such famous roots as this, and I shall be with you.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0769">The residue of my downward progress was comparatively easy; the roots were in greater abundance, and in one or two places jutting out points of rock assisted me greatly. </span>
      <span id="f0770">In a few moments I was standing by the side of my companion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0771">Substituting a stout stick for the one I had thrown aside at the top of the precipice, we now continued our course along the bed of the ravine. </span>
      <span id="f0772">Soon we were saluted by a sound in advance, that grew by degrees louder and louder, as the noise of the cataract we were leaving behind gradually died on our ears.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0773">‘Another precipice for us, Toby.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0774">‘Very good; we can descend them, you know--come on.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0775">Nothing indeed appeared to depress or intimidate this intrepid fellow. </span>
      <span id="f0776">Typees or Niagaras, he was as ready to engage one as the other, and I could not avoid a thousand times congratulating myself upon having such a companion in an enterprise like the present.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0777">After an hour’s painful progress, we reached the verge of another fall, still loftier than the preceding and flanked both above and below with the same steep masses of rock, presenting, however, here and there narrow irregular ledges, supporting a shallow soil, on which grew a variety of bushes and trees, whose bright verdure contrasted beautifully with the foamy waters that flowed between them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0778">Toby, who invariably acted as pioneer, now proceeded to reconnoitre. </span>
      <span id="f0779">On his return, he reported that the shelves of rock on our right would enable us to gain with little risk the bottom of the cataract. </span>
      <span id="f0780">Accordingly, leaving the bed of the stream at the very point where it thundered down, we began crawling along one of those sloping ledges until it carried us to within a few feet of another that inclined downwards at a still sharper angle, and upon which, by assisting each other we managed to alight in safety. </span>
      <span id="f0781">We warily crept along this, steadying ourselves by the naked roots of the shrubs that clung to every fissure. </span>
      <span id="f0782">As we proceeded, the narrow path became still more contracted, rendering it difficult for us to maintain our footing, until suddenly, as we reached an angle of the wall of rock where we had expected it to widen, we perceived to our consternation that a yard or two further on it abruptly terminated at a place we could not possibly hope to pass.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0783">Toby as usual led the van, and in silence I waited to learn from him how he proposed to extricate us from this new difficulty.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0784">‘Well, my boy,’ I exclaimed, after the expiration of several minutes, during which time my companion had not uttered a word, ‘what’s to be done now?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0785">He replied in a tranquil tone, that probably the best thing we could do in our present strait was to get out of it as soon as possible.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0786">‘Yes, my dear Toby, but tell me how we are to get out of it.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0787">‘Something in this sort of style,’ he replied, and at the same moment to my horror he slipped sideways off the rocks and, as I then thought, by good fortune merely, alighted among the spreading branches of a species of palm tree, that shooting its hardy roots along a ledge below, curved its trunk upwards into the air, and presented a thick mass of foliage about twenty feet below the spot where we had thus suddenly been brought to a standstill. </span>
      <span id="f0788">I involuntarily held my breath, expecting to see the form of my companion, after being sustained for a moment by the branches of the tree, sink through their frail support, and fall headlong to the bottom. </span>
      <span id="f0789">To my surprise and joy, however, he recovered himself, and disentangling his limbs from the fractured branches, he peered out from his leafy bed, and shouted lustily, ‘Come on, my hearty there is no other alternative!’ and with this he ducked beneath the foliage, and slipping down the trunk, stood in a moment at least fifty feet beneath me, upon the broad shelf of rock from which sprung the tree he had descended.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0790">What would I not have given at that moment to have been by his side. </span>
      <span id="f0791">The feat he had just accomplished seemed little less than miraculous, and I could hardly credit the evidence of my senses when I saw the wide distance that a single daring act had so suddenly placed between us.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0792">Toby’s animating ‘come on’ again sounded in my ears, and dreading to lose all confidence in myself if I remained meditating upon the step, I once more gazed down to assure myself of the relative bearing of the tree and my own position, and then closing my eyes and uttering one comprehensive ejaculation of prayer, I inclined myself over towards the abyss, and after one breathless instant fell with a crash into the tree, the branches snapping and cracking with my weight, as I sunk lower and lower among them, until I was stopped by coming in contact with a sturdy limb.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0793">In a few moments I was standing at the foot of the tree manipulating myself all over with a view of ascertaining the extent of the injuries I had received. </span>
      <span id="f0794">To my surprise the only effects of my feat were a few slight contusions too trifling to care about. </span>
      <span id="f0795">The rest of our descent was easily accomplished, and in half an hour after regaining the ravine we had partaken of our evening morsel, built our hut as usual, and crawled under its shelter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0796">The next morning, in spite of our debility and the agony of hunger under which we were now suffering, though neither of us confessed to the fact, we struggled along our dismal and still difficult and dangerous path, cheered by the hope of soon catching a glimpse of the valley before us, and towards evening the voice of a cataract which had for some time sounded like a low deep bass to the music of the smaller waterfalls, broke upon our ears in still louder tones, and assured us that we were approaching its vicinity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0797">That evening we stood on the brink of a precipice, over which the dark stream bounded in one final leap of full 300 feet. </span>
      <span id="f0798">The sheer descent terminated in the region we so long had sought. </span>
      <span id="f0799">On each side of the fall, two lofty and perpendicular bluffs buttressed the sides of the enormous cliff, and projected into the sea of verdure with which the valley waved, and a range of similar projecting eminences stood disposed in a half circle about the head if the vale. </span>
      <span id="f0800">A thick canopy of trees hung over the very verge of the fall, leaving an arched aperture for the passage of the waters, which imparted a strange picturesqueness to the scene.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0801">The valley was now before us; but instead of being conducted into its smiling bosom by the gradual descent of the deep watercourse we had thus far pursued, all our labours now appeared to have been rendered futile by its abrupt termination. </span>
      <span id="f0802">But, bitterly disappointed, we did not entirely despair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0803">As it was now near sunset we determined to pass the night where we were, and on the morrow, refreshed by sleep, and by eating at one meal all our stock of food, to accomplish a descent into the valley, or perish in the attempt.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0804">We laid ourselves down that night on a spot, the recollection of which still makes me shudder. </span>
      <span id="f0805">A small table of rock which projected over the precipice on one side of the stream, and was drenched by the spray of the fall, sustained a huge trunk of a tree which must have been deposited there by some heavy freshet. </span>
      <span id="f0806">It lay obliquely, with one end resting on the rock and the other supported by the side of the ravine. </span>
      <span id="f0807">Against it we placed in a sloping direction a number of the half decayed boughs that were strewn about, and covering the whole with twigs and leaves, awaited the morning’s light beneath such shelter as it afforded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0808">During the whole of this night the continual roaring of the cataract--the dismal moaning of the gale through the trees--the pattering of the rain, and the profound darkness, affected my spirits to a degree which nothing had ever before produced. </span>
      <span id="f0809">Wet, half famished, and chilled to the heart with the dampness of the place, and nearly wild with the pain I endured, I fairly cowered down to the earth under this multiplication of hardships, and abandoned myself to frightful anticipations of evil; and my companion, whose spirit at last was a good deal broken, scarcely uttered a word during the whole night.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0810">At length the day dawned upon us, and rising from our miserable pallet, we stretched our stiffened joints, and after eating all that remained of our bread, prepared for the last stage of our journey. </span>
      <span id="f0811">I will not recount every hair-breadth escape, and every fearful difficulty that occurred before we succeeded in reaching the bosom of the valley. </span>
      <span id="f0812">As I have already described similar scenes, it will be sufficient to say that at length, after great toil and great dangers, we both stood with no limbs broken at the head of that magnificent vale which five days before had so suddenly burst upon my sight, and almost beneath the shadow of those very cliffs from whose summits we had gazed upon the prospect.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>