<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
      <p>
      <span id="f01345">CHAPTER FOURTEEN</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01346">A GREAT EVENT HAPPENS IN THE VALLEY--THE ISLAND TELEGRAPH--SOMETHING BEFALLS TOBY--FAYAWAY DISPLAYS A TENDER HEART--MELANCHOLY REFLECTIONS--MYSTERIOUS CONDUCT OF THE ISLANDERS--DEVOTION OF KORY-KORY--A RURAL COUCH--A LUXURY--KORY-KORY STRIKES A LIGHT A LA TYPEE</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01347">IN the course of a few days Toby had recovered from the effects of his adventure with the Happar warriors; the wound on his head rapidly healing under the vegetable treatment of the good Tinor. </span>
      <span id="f01348">Less fortunate than my companion however, I still continued to languish under a complaint, the origin and nature of which were still a mystery. </span>
      <span id="f01349">Cut off as I was from all intercourse with the civilized world, and feeling the inefficacy of anything the natives could do to relieve me; knowing, too, that so long as I remained in my present condition, it would be impossible for me to leave the valley, whatever opportunity might present itself; and apprehensive that ere long we might be exposed to some caprice on the part of the islanders, I now gave up all hopes of recovery, and became a prey to the most gloomy thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f01350">A deep dejection fell upon me, which neither the friendly remonstrances of my companion, the devoted attentions of Kory-Kory nor all the soothing influences of Fayaway could remove.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01351">One morning as I lay on the mats in the house, plunged in melancholy reverie, and regardless of everything around me, Toby, who had left me about an hour, returned in haste, and with great glee told me to cheer up and be of good heart; for he believed, from what was going on among the natives, that there were boats approaching the bay.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01352">These tidings operated upon me like magic. </span>
      <span id="f01353">The hour of our deliverance was at hand, and starting up, I was soon convinced that something unusual was about to occur. </span>
      <span id="f01354">The word ‘botee! </span>
      <span id="f01355">botee!’ was vociferated in all directions; and shouts were heard in the distance, at first feebly and faintly; but growing louder and nearer at each successive repetition, until they were caught up by a fellow in a cocoanut tree a few yards off, who sounding them in turn, they were reiterated from a neighbouring grove, and so died away gradually from point to point, as the intelligence penetrated into the farthest recess of the valley. </span>
      <span id="f01356">This was the vocal telegraph of the islanders; by means of which condensed items of information could be carried in a very few minutes from the sea to their remotest habitation, a distance of at least eight or nine miles. </span>
      <span id="f01357">On the present occasion it was in active operation; one piece of information following another with inconceivable rapidity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01358">The greatest commotion now appeared to prevail. </span>
      <span id="f01359">At every fresh item of intelligence the natives betrayed the liveliest interest, and redoubled the energy with which they employed themselves in collecting fruit to sell to the expected visitors. </span>
      <span id="f01360">Some were tearing off the husks from cocoanuts; some perched in the trees were throwing down bread-fruit to their companions, who gathered them into heaps as they fell; while others were plying their fingers rapidly in weaving leafen baskets in which to carry the fruit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01361">There were other matters too going on at the same time. </span>
      <span id="f01362">Here you would see a stout warrior polishing his spear with a bit of old tappa, or adjusting the folds of the girdle about his waist; and there you might descry a young damsel decorating herself with flowers, as if having in her eye some maidenly conquest; while, as in all cases of hurry and confusion in every part of the world, a number of individuals kept hurrying to and fro, with amazing vigour and perseverance, doing nothing themselves, and hindering others.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01363">Never before had we seen the islanders in such a state of bustle and excitement; and the scene furnished abundant evidence of the fact--that it was only at long intervals any such events occur.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01364">When I thought of the length of time that might intervene before a similar chance of escape would be presented, I bitterly lamented that I had not the power of availing myself effectually of the present opportunity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01365">From all that we could gather, it appeared that the natives were fearful of arriving too late upon the beach, unless they made extraordinary exertions. </span>
      <span id="f01366">Sick and lame as I was, I would have started with Toby at once, had not Kory-Kory not only refused to carry me, but manifested the most invincible repugnance to our leaving the neighbourhood of the house. </span>
      <span id="f01367">The rest of the savages were equally opposed to our wishes, and seemed grieved and astonished at the earnestness of my solicitations. </span>
      <span id="f01368">I clearly perceived that while my attendant avoided all appearance of constraining my movements, he was nevertheless determined to thwart my wishes. </span>
      <span id="f01369">He seemed to me on this particular occasion, as well as often afterwards, to be executing the orders of some other person with regard to me, though at the same time feeling towards me the most lively affection.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01370">Toby, who had made up his mind to accompany the islanders if possible, as soon as they were in readiness to depart, and who for that reason had refrained from showing the same anxiety that I had done, now represented to me that it was idle for me to entertain the hope of reaching the beach in time to profit by any opportunity that might then be presented.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01371">‘Do you not see,’ said he, ‘the savages themselves are fearful of being too late, and I should hurry forward myself at once did I not think that if I showed too much eagerness I should destroy all our hopes of reaping any benefit from this fortunate event. </span>
      <span id="f01372">If you will only endeavour to appear tranquil or unconcerned, you will quiet their suspicions, and I have no doubt they will then let me go with them to the beach, supposing that I merely go out of curiosity. </span>
      <span id="f01373">Should I succeed in getting down to the boats, I will make known the condition in which I have left you, and measures may then be taken to secure our escape.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01374">In the expediency of this I could not but acquiesce; and as the natives had now completed their preparations, I watched with the liveliest interest the reception that Toby’s application might meet with. </span>
      <span id="f01375">As soon as they understood from my companion that I intended to remain, they appeared to make no objection to his proposition, and even hailed it with pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f01376">Their singular conduct on this occasion not a little puzzled me at the time, and imparted to subsequent events an additional mystery.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01377">The islanders were now to be seen hurrying along the path which led to the sea. </span>
      <span id="f01378">I shook Toby warmly by the hand, and gave him my Payta hat to shield his wounded head from the sun, as he had lost his own. </span>
      <span id="f01379">He cordially returned the pressure of my hand, and solemnly promising to return as soon as the boats should leave the shore, sprang from my side, and the next minute disappeared in a turn of the grove.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01380">In spite of the unpleasant reflections that crowded upon my mind, I could not but be entertained by the novel and animated sight which by now met my view. </span>
      <span id="f01381">One after another the natives crowded along the narrow path, laden with every variety of fruit. </span>
      <span id="f01382">Here, you might have seen one, who, after ineffectually endeavouring to persuade a surly porker to be conducted in leading strings, was obliged at last to seize the perverse animal in his arms, and carry him struggling against his naked breast, and squealing without intermission. </span>
      <span id="f01383">There went two, who at a little distance might have been taken for the Hebrew spies, on their return to Moses with the goodly bunch of grape. </span>
      <span id="f01384">One trotted before the other at a distance of a couple of yards, while between them, from a pole resting on the shoulders, was suspended a huge cluster of bananas, which swayed to and fro with the rocking gait at which they proceeded. </span>
      <span id="f01385">Here ran another, perspiring with his exertions, and bearing before him a quantity of cocoanuts, who, fearful of being too late, heeded not the fruit that dropped from his basket, and appeared solely intent upon reaching his destination, careless how many of his cocoanuts kept company with him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01386">In a short time the last straggler was seen hurrying on his way, and the faint shouts of those in advance died insensibly upon the ear. </span>
      <span id="f01387">Our part of the valley now appeared nearly deserted by its inhabitants, Kory-Kory, his aged father, and a few decrepit old people, being all that were left.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01388">Towards sunset the islanders in small parties began to return from the beach, and among them, as they drew near to the house, I sought to descry the form of my companion. </span>
      <span id="f01389">But one after another they passed the dwelling, and I caught no glimpse of him. </span>
      <span id="f01390">Supposing, however, that he would soon appear with some of the members of the household, I quieted my apprehensions, and waited patiently to see him advancing in company with the beautiful Fayaway. </span>
      <span id="f01391">At last, I perceived Tinor coming forward, followed by the girls and young men who usually resided in the house of Marheyo; but with them came not my comrade, and, filled with a thousand alarms, I eagerly sought to discover the cause of his delay.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01392">My earnest questions appeared to embarrass the natives greatly. </span>
      <span id="f01393">All their accounts were contradictory: one giving me to understand that Toby would be with me in a very short time; another that he did not know where he was; while a third, violently inveighing, against him, assured me that he had stolen away, and would never come back. </span>
      <span id="f01394">It appeared to me, at the time, that in making these various statements they endeavoured to conceal from me some terrible disaster, lest the knowledge of it should overpower me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01395">Fearful lest some fatal calamity had overtaken him, I sought out young Fayaway, and endeavoured to learn from her, if possible, the truth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01396">This gentle being had early attracted my regard, not only from her extraordinary beauty, but from the attractive cast of her countenance, singularly expressive of intelligence and humanity. </span>
      <span id="f01397">Of all the natives she alone seemed to appreciate the effect which the peculiarity of the circumstances in which we were placed had produced upon the minds of my companion and myself. </span>
      <span id="f01398">In addressing me--especially when I lay reclining upon the mats suffering from pain--there was a tenderness in her manner which it was impossible to misunderstand or resist. </span>
      <span id="f01399">Whenever she entered the house, the expression of her face indicated the liveliest sympathy for me; and moving towards the place where I lay, with one arm slightly elevated in a gesture of pity, and her large glistening eyes gazing intently into mine, she would murmur plaintively, ‘Awha! </span>
      <span id="f01400">awha! </span>
      <span id="f01401">Tommo,’ and seat herself mournfully beside me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01402">Her manner convinced me that she deeply compassionated my situation, as being removed from my country and friends, and placed beyond the reach of all relief. </span>
      <span id="f01403">Indeed, at times I was almost led to believe that her mind was swayed by gentle impulses hardly to be anticipated from one in her condition; that she appeared to be conscious there were ties rudely severed, which had once bound us to our homes; that there were sisters and brothers anxiously looking forward to our return, who were, perhaps, never more to behold us.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01404">In this amiable light did Fayaway appear in my eyes; and reposing full confidence in her candour and intelligence, I now had recourse to her, in the midst of my alarm, with regard to my companion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01405">My questions evidently distressed her. </span>
      <span id="f01406">She looked round from one to another of the bystanders, as if hardly knowing what answer to give me. </span>
      <span id="f01407">At last, yielding to my importunities, she overcame her scruples, and gave me to understand that Toby had gone away with the boats which had visited the bay, but had promised to return at the expiration of three days. </span>
      <span id="f01408">At first I accused him of perfidiously deserting me; but as I grew more composed, I upbraided myself for imputing so cowardly an action to him, and tranquillized myself with the belief that he had availed himself, of the opportunity to go round to Nukuheva, in order to make some arrangement by which I could be removed from the valley. </span>
      <span id="f01409">At any rate, thought I, he will return with the medicines I require, and then, as soon as I recover, there will be no difficulty in the way of our departure.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01410">Consoling myself with these reflections, I lay down that night in a happier frame of mind than I had done for some time. </span>
      <span id="f01411">The next day passed without any allusion to Toby on the part of the natives, who seemed desirous of avoiding all reference to the subject. </span>
      <span id="f01412">This raised some apprehensions in my breast; but when night came, I congratulated myself that the second day had now gone by, and that on the morrow Toby would again be with me. </span>
      <span id="f01413">But the morrow came and went, and my companion did not appear. </span>
      <span id="f01414">Ah! </span>
      <span id="f01415">thought I, he reckons three days from the morning of his departure,--tomorrow he will arrive. </span>
      <span id="f01416">But that weary day also closed upon me, without his return. </span>
      <span id="f01417">Even yet I would not despair; I thought that something detained him--that he was waiting for the sailing of a boat, at Nukuheva, and that in a day or two at farthest I should see him again. </span>
      <span id="f01418">But day after day of renewed disappointment passed by; at last hope deserted me, and I fell a victim to despair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01419">Yes; thought I, gloomily, he has secured his own escape, and cares not what calamity may befall his unfortunate comrade. </span>
      <span id="f01420">Fool that I was, to suppose that any one would willingly encounter the perils of this valley, after having once got beyond its limits! </span>
      <span id="f01421">He has gone, and has left me to combat alone all the dangers by which I am surrounded. </span>
      <span id="f01422">Thus would I sometimes seek to derive a desperate consolation from dwelling upon the perfidity of Toby: whilst at other times I sunk under the bitter remorse which I felt as having by my own imprudence brought upon myself the fate which I was sure awaited me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01423">At other times I thought that perhaps after all these treacherous savages had made away with him, and thence the confusion into which they were thrown by my questions, and their contradictory answers, or he might be a captive in some other part of the valley, or, more dreadful still, might have met with that fate at which my very soul shuddered. </span>
      <span id="f01424">But all these speculations were vain; no tidings of Toby ever reached me; he had gone never to return.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01425">The conduct of the islanders appeared inexplicable. </span>
      <span id="f01426">All reference to my lost comrade was carefully evaded, and if at any time they were forced to make some reply to my frequent inquiries on the subject, they would uniformly denounce him as an ungrateful runaway, who had deserted his friend, and taken himself off to that vile and detestable place Nukuheva.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01427">But whatever might have been his fate, now that he was gone the natives multiplied their acts of kindness and attention towards myself, treating me with a degree of deference which could hardly have been surpassed had I been some celestial visitant. </span>
      <span id="f01428">Kory-Kory never for one moment left my side, unless it were to execute my wishes. </span>
      <span id="f01429">The faithful fellow, twice every day, in the cool of the morning and in the evening, insisted upon carrying me to the stream, and bathing me in its refreshing water.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01430">Frequently in the afternoon he would carry me to a particular part of the stream, where the beauty of the scene produced a soothing influence upon my mind. </span>
      <span id="f01431">At this place the waters flowed between grassy banks, planted with enormous bread-fruit trees, whose vast branches interlacing overhead, formed a leafy canopy; near the stream were several smooth black rocks. </span>
      <span id="f01432">One of these, projecting several feet above the surface of the water, had upon its summit a shallow cavity, which, filled with freshly-gathered leaves, formed a delightful couch.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01433">Here I often lay for hours, covered with a gauze-like veil of tappa, while Fayaway, seated beside me, and holding in her hand a fan woven from the leaflets of a young cocoanut bough, brushed aside the insects that occasionally lighted on my face, and Kory-Kory, with a view of chasing away my melancholy, performed a thousand antics in the water before us.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01434">As my eye wandered along this romantic stream, it would fall upon the half-immersed figure of a beautiful girl, standing in the transparent water, and catching in a little net a species of diminutive shell-fish, of which these people are extraordinarily fond. </span>
      <span id="f01435">Sometimes a chattering group would be seated upon the edge of a low rock in the midst of the brook, busily engaged in thinning and polishing the shells of cocoanuts, by rubbing them briskly with a small stone in the water, an operation which soon converts them into a light and elegant drinking vessel, somewhat resembling goblets made of tortoise shell.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01436">But the tranquillizing influence of beautiful scenery, and the exhibition of human life under so novel and charming an aspect were not my only sources of consolation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01437">Every evening the girls of the house gathered about me on the mats, and after chasing away Kory-Kory from my side--who nevertheless, retired only to a little distance and watched their proceedings with the most jealous attention--would anoint my whole body with a fragrant oil, squeezed from a yellow root, previously pounded between a couple of stones, and which in their language is denominated ‘aka’. </span>
      <span id="f01438">And most refreshing and agreeable are the juices of the ‘aka’, when applied to ones, limbs by the soft palms of sweet nymphs, whose bright eyes are beaming upon you with kindness; and I used to hail with delight the daily recurrence of this luxurious operation, in which I forgot all my troubles, and buried for the time every feeling of sorrow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01439">Sometimes in the cool of the evening my devoted servitor would lead me out upon the pi-pi in front of the house, and seating me near its edge, protect my body from the annoyance of the insects which occasionally hovered in the air, by wrapping me round with a large roll of tappa. </span>
      <span id="f01440">He then bustled about, and employed himself at least twenty minutes in adjusting everything to secure my personal comfort.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01441">Having perfected his arrangements, he would get my pipe, and, lighting it, would hand it to me. </span>
      <span id="f01442">Often he was obliged to strike a light for the occasion, and as the mode he adopted was entirely different from what I had ever seen or heard of before I will describe it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01443">A straight, dry, and partly decayed stick of the Hibiscus, about six feet in length, and half as many inches in diameter, with a small, bit of wood not more than a foot long, and scarcely an inch wide, is as invariably to be met with in every house in Typee as a box of lucifer matches in the corner of a kitchen cupboard at home.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01444">The islander, placing the larger stick obliquely against some object, with one end elevated at an angle of forty-five degrees, mounts astride of it like an urchin about to gallop off upon a cane, and then grasping the smaller one firmly in both hands, he rubs its pointed end slowly up and down the extent of a few inches on the principal stick, until at last he makes a narrow groove in the wood, with an abrupt termination at the point furthest from him, where all the dusty particles which the friction creates are accumulated in a little heap.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01445">At first Kory-Kory goes to work quite leisurely, but gradually quickens his pace, and waxing warm in the employment, drives the stick furiously along the smoking channel, plying his hands to and fro with amazing rapidity, the perspiration starting from every pore. </span>
      <span id="f01446">As he approaches the climax of his effort, he pants and gasps for breath, and his eyes almost start from their sockets with the violence of his exertions. </span>
      <span id="f01447">This is the critical stage of the operation; all his previous labours are vain if he cannot sustain the rapidity of the movement until the reluctant spark is produced. </span>
      <span id="f01448">Suddenly he stops, becoming perfectly motionless. </span>
      <span id="f01449">His hands still retain their hold of the smaller stick, which is pressed convulsively against the further end of the channel among the fine powder there accumulated, as if he had just pierced through and through some little viper that was wriggling and struggling to escape from his clutches. </span>
      <span id="f01450">The next moment a delicate wreath of smoke curls spirally into the air, the heap of dusty particles glows with fire, and Kory-Kory, almost breathless, dismounts from his steed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01451">This operation appeared to me to be the most laborious species of work performed in Typee; and had I possessed a sufficient intimacy with the language to have conveyed my ideas upon the subject, I should certainly have suggested to the most influential of the natives the expediency of establishing a college of vestals to be centrally located in the valley, for the purpose of keeping alive the indispensable article of fire; so as to supersede the necessity of such a vast outlay of strength and good temper, as were usually squandered on these occasions. </span>
      <span id="f01452">There might, however, be special difficulties in carrying this plan into execution.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01453">What a striking evidence does this operation furnish of the wide difference between the extreme of savage and civilized life. </span>
      <span id="f01454">A gentleman of Typee can bring up a numerous family of children and give them all a highly respectable cannibal education, with infinitely less toil and anxiety than he expends in the simple process of striking a light; whilst a poor European artisan, who through the instrumentality of a lucifer performs the same operation in one second, is put to his wit’s end to provide for his starving offspring that food which the children of a Polynesian father, without troubling their parents, pluck from the branches of every tree around them.</span>
      </p>
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>