<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER SEVENTEEN</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1576">CHAPTER SEVENTEEN</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1577">IMPROVEMENT IN HEALTH AND SPIRITS--FELICITY OF THE TYPEES--THEIR ENJOYMENTS COMPARED WITH THOSE OF MORE ENLIGHTENED COMMUNITIES--COMPARATIVE WICKEDNESS OF CIVILIZED AND UNENLIGHTENED PEOPLE--A SKIRMISH IN THE MOUNTAIN WITH THE WARRIORS OF HAPPAR</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1578">DAY after day wore on, and still there was no perceptible change in the conduct of the islanders towards me. </span>
      <span id="f1579">Gradually I lost all knowledge of the regular recurrence of the days of the week, and sunk insensibly into that kind of apathy which ensues after some violent outburst of despair. </span>
      <span id="f1580">My limb suddenly healed, the swelling went down, the pain subsided, and I had every reason to suppose I should soon completely recover from the affliction that had so long tormented me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1581">As soon as I was enabled to ramble about the valley in company with the natives, troops of whom followed me whenever I sallied out of the house, I began to experience an elasticity of mind which placed me beyond the reach of those dismal forebodings to which I had so lately been a prey. </span>
      <span id="f1582">Received wherever I went with the most deferential kindness; regaled perpetually with the most delightful fruits; ministered to by dark-eyed nymphs, and enjoying besides all the services of the devoted Kory-Kory, I thought that, for a sojourn among cannibals, no man could have well made a more agreeable one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1583">To be sure there were limits set to my wanderings. </span>
      <span id="f1584">Toward the sea my progress was barred by an express prohibition of the savages; and after having made two or three ineffectual attempts to reach it, as much to gratify my curiosity as anything else, I gave up the idea. </span>
      <span id="f1585">It was in vain to think of reaching it by stealth, since the natives escorted me in numbers wherever I went, and not for one single moment that I can recall to mind was I ever permitted to be alone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1586">The green and precipitous elevations that stood ranged around the head of the vale where Marheyo’s habitation was situated effectually precluded all hope of escape in that quarter, even if I could have stolen away from the thousand eyes of the savages.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1587">But these reflections now seldom obtruded upon me; I gave myself up to the passing hour, and if ever disagreeable thoughts arose in my mind, I drove them away. </span>
      <span id="f1588">When I looked around the verdant recess in which I was buried, and gazed up to the summits of the lofty eminence that hemmed me in, I was well disposed to think that I was in the ‘Happy Valley’, and that beyond those heights there was naught but a world of care and anxiety. </span>
      <span id="f1589">As I extended my wanderings in the valley and grew more familiar with the habits of its inmates, I was fain to confess that, despite the disadvantages of his condition, the Polynesian savage, surrounded by all the luxurious provisions of nature, enjoyed an infinitely happier, though certainly a less intellectual existence than the self-complacent European.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1590">The naked wretch who shivers beneath the bleak skies, and starves among the inhospitable wilds of Tierra-del-Fuego, might indeed be made happier by civilization, for it would alleviate his physical wants. </span>
      <span id="f1591">But the voluptuous Indian, with every desire supplied, whom Providence has bountifully provided with all the sources of pure and natural enjoyment, and from whom are removed so many of the ills and pains of life--what has he to desire at the hands of Civilization? </span>
      <span id="f1592">She may ‘cultivate his mind--may elevate his thoughts,’--these I believe are the established phrases--but will he be the happier? </span>
      <span id="f1593">Let the once smiling and populous Hawaiian islands, with their now diseased, starving, and dying natives, answer the question. </span>
      <span id="f1594">The missionaries may seek to disguise the matter as they will, but the facts are incontrovertible; and the devoutest Christian who visits that group with an unbiased mind, must go away mournfully asking--‘Are these, alas! </span>
      <span id="f1595">the fruits of twenty-five years of enlightening?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1596">In a primitive state of society, the enjoyments of life, though few and simple, are spread over a great extent, and are unalloyed; but Civilization, for every advantage she imparts, holds a hundred evils in reserve;--the heart-burnings, the jealousies, the social rivalries, the family dissentions, and the thousand self-inflicted discomforts of refined life, which make up in units the swelling aggregate of human misery, are unknown among these unsophisticated people.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1597">But it will be urged that these shocking unprincipled wretches are cannibals. </span>
      <span id="f1598">Very true; and a rather bad trait in their character it must be allowed. </span>
      <span id="f1599">But they are such only when they seek to gratify the passion of revenge upon their enemies; and I ask whether the mere eating of human flesh so very far exceeds in barbarity that custom which only a few years since was practised in enlightened England:--a convicted traitor, perhaps a man found guilty of honesty, patriotism, and suchlike heinous crimes, had his head lopped off with a huge axe, his bowels dragged out and thrown into a fire; while his body, carved into four quarters, was with his head exposed upon pikes, and permitted to rot and fester among the public haunts of men!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1600">The fiend-like skill we display in the invention of all manner of death-dealing engines, the vindictiveness with which we carry on our wars, and the misery and desolation that follow in their train, are enough of themselves to distinguish the white civilized man as the most ferocious animal on the face of the earth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1601">His remorseless cruelty is seen in many of the institutions of our own favoured land. </span>
      <span id="f1602">There is one in particular lately adopted in one of the States of the Union, which purports to have been dictated by the most merciful considerations. </span>
      <span id="f1603">To destroy our malefactors piece-meal, drying up in their veins, drop by drop, the blood we are too chicken-hearted to shed by a single blow which would at once put a period to their sufferings, is deemed to be infinitely preferable to the old-fashioned punishment of gibbeting--much less annoying to the victim, and more in accordance with the refined spirit of the age; and yet how feeble is all language to describe the horrors we inflict upon these wretches, whom we mason up in the cells of our prisons, and condemn to perpetual solitude in the very heart of our population.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1604">But it is needless to multiply the examples of civilized barbarity; they far exceed in the amount of misery they cause the crimes which we regard with such abhorrence in our less enlightened fellow-creatures.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1605">The term ‘Savage’ is, I conceive, often misapplied, and indeed, when I consider the vices, cruelties, and enormities of every kind that spring up in the tainted atmosphere of a feverish civilization, I am inclined to think that so far as the relative wickedness of the parties is concerned, four or five Marquesan Islanders sent to the United States as Missionaries might be quite as useful as an equal number of Americans despatched to the Islands in a similar capacity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1606">I once heard it given as an instance of the frightful depravity of a certain tribe in the Pacific that they had no word in their language to express the idea of virtue. </span>
      <span id="f1607">The assertion was unfounded; but were it otherwise, it might be met by stating that their language is almost entirely destitute of terms to express the delightful ideas conveyed by our endless catalogue of civilized crimes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1608">In the altered frame of mind to which I have referred, every object that presented itself to my notice in the valley struck me in a new light, and the opportunities I now enjoyed of observing the manners of its inmates, tended to strengthen my favourable impressions. </span>
      <span id="f1609">One peculiarity that fixed my admiration was the perpetual hilarity reigning through the whole extent of the vale.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1610">There seemed to be no cares, griefs, troubles, or vexations, in all Typee. </span>
      <span id="f1611">The hours tripped along as gaily as the laughing couples down a country dance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1612">There were none of those thousand sources of irritation that the ingenuity of civilized man has created to mar his own felicity. </span>
      <span id="f1613">There were no foreclosures of mortgages, no protested notes, no bills payable, no debts of honour in Typee; no unreasonable tailors and shoemakers perversely bent on being paid; no duns of any description and battery attorneys, to foment discord, backing their clients up to a quarrel, and then knocking their heads together; no poor relations, everlastingly occupying the spare bed-chamber, and diminishing the elbow room at the family table; no destitute widows with their children starving on the cold charities of the world; no beggars; no debtors’ prisons; no proud and hard-hearted nabobs in Typee; or to sum up all in one word--no Money! </span>
      <span id="f1614">‘That root of all evil’ was not to be found in the valley.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1615">In this secluded abode of happiness there were no cross old women, no cruel step-dames, no withered spinsters, no lovesick maidens, no sour old bachelors, no inattentive husbands, no melancholy young men, no blubbering youngsters, and no squalling brats. </span>
      <span id="f1616">All was mirth, fun and high good humour. </span>
      <span id="f1617">Blue devils, hypochondria, and doleful dumps, went and hid themselves among the nooks and crannies of the rocks.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1618">Here you would see a parcel of children frolicking together the live-long day, and no quarrelling, no contention, among them. </span>
      <span id="f1619">The same number in our own land could not have played together for the space of an hour without biting or scratching one another. </span>
      <span id="f1620">There you might have seen a throng of young females, not filled with envyings of each other’s charms, nor displaying the ridiculous affectations of gentility, nor yet moving in whalebone corsets, like so many automatons, but free, inartificially happy, and unconstrained.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1621">There were some spots in that sunny vale where they would frequently resort to decorate themselves with garlands of flowers. </span>
      <span id="f1622">To have seen them reclining beneath the shadows of one of the beautiful groves; the ground about them strewn with freshly gathered buds and blossoms, employed in weaving chaplets and necklaces, one would have thought that all the train of Flora had gathered together to keep a festival in honour of their mistress.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1623">With the young men there seemed almost always some matter of diversion or business on hand that afforded a constant variety of enjoyment. </span>
      <span id="f1624">But whether fishing, or carving canoes, or polishing their ornaments, never was there exhibited the least sign of strife or contention among them. </span>
      <span id="f1625">As for the warriors, they maintained a tranquil dignity of demeanour, journeying occasionally from house to house, where they were always sure to be received with the attention bestowed upon distinguished guests. </span>
      <span id="f1626">The old men, of whom there were many in the vale, seldom stirred from their mats, where they would recline for hours and hours, smoking and talking to one another with all the garrulity of age.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1627">But the continual happiness, which so far as I was able to judge appeared to prevail in the valley, sprang principally from that all-pervading sensation which Rousseau has told us be at one time experienced, the mere buoyant sense of a healthful physical existence. </span>
      <span id="f1628">And indeed in this particular the Typees had ample reason to felicitate themselves, for sickness was almost unknown. </span>
      <span id="f1629">During the whole period of my stay I saw but one invalid among them; and on their smooth skins you observed no blemish or mark of disease.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1630">The general repose, however, upon which I have just been descanting, was broken in upon about this time by an event which proved that the islanders were not entirely exempt from those occurrences which disturb the quiet of more civilized communities.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1631">Having now been a considerable time in the valley, I began to feel surprised that the violent hostility subsisting between its inhabitants, and those of the adjoining bay of Happar, should never have manifested itself in any warlike encounter. </span>
      <span id="f1632">Although the valiant Typees would often by gesticulations declare their undying hatred against their enemies, and the disgust they felt at their cannibal propensities; although they dilated upon the manifold injuries they had received at their hands, yet with a forbearance truly commendable, they appeared to sit down under their grievances, and to refrain from making any reprisals. </span>
      <span id="f1633">The Happars, entrenched behind their mountains, and never even showing themselves on their summits, did not appear to me to furnish adequate cause for that excess of animosity evinced towards them by the heroic tenants of our vale, and I was inclined to believe that the deeds of blood attributed to them had been greatly exaggerated.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1634">On the other hand, as the clamours of war had not up to this period disturbed the serenity of the tribe, I began to distrust the truth of those reports which ascribed so fierce and belligerent a character to the Typee nation. </span>
      <span id="f1635">Surely, thought I, all these terrible stories I have heard about the inveteracy with which they carried on the feud, their deadly intensity, of hatred and the diabolical malice with which they glutted their revenge upon the inanimate forms of the slain, are nothing more than fables, and I must confess that I experienced something like a sense of regret at having my hideous anticipations thus disappointed. </span>
      <span id="f1636">I felt in some sort like a ‘prentice boy who, going to the play in the expectation of being delighted with a cut-and-thrust tragedy, is almost moved to tears of disappointment at the exhibition of a genteel comedy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1637">I could not avoid thinking that I had fallen in with a greatly traduced people, and I moralized not a little upon the disadvantage of having a bad name, which in this instance had given a tribe of savages, who were as pacific as so many lambkins, the reputation of a confederacy of giant-killers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1638">But subsequent events proved that I had been a little too premature in coming to this conclusion. </span>
      <span id="f1639">One, day about noon, happening to be at the Ti, I had lain down on the mats with several of the chiefs, and had gradually sunk into a most luxurious siesta, when I was awakened by a tremendous outcry, and starting up beheld the natives seizing their spears and hurrying out, while the most puissant of the chiefs, grasping the six muskets which were ranged against the bamboos, followed after, and soon disappeared in the groves. </span>
      <span id="f1640">These movements were accompanied by wild shouts, in which ‘Happar, Happar,’ greatly predominated. </span>
      <span id="f1641">The islanders were now seen running past the Ti, and striking across the valley to the Happar side. </span>
      <span id="f1642">Presently I heard the sharp report of a musket from the adjoining hills, and then a burst of voices in the same direction. </span>
      <span id="f1643">At this the women who had congregated in the groves, set up the most violent clamours, as they invariably do here as elsewhere on every occasion of excitement and alarm, with a view of tranquillizing their own minds and disturbing other people. </span>
      <span id="f1644">On this particular occasion they made such an outrageous noise, and continued it with such perseverance, that for awhile, had entire volleys of musketry been fired off in the neighbouring mountains, I should not have been able to have heard them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1645">When this female commotion had a little subsided I listened eagerly for further information. </span>
      <span id="f1646">At last bang went another shot, and then a second volley of yells from the hills. </span>
      <span id="f1647">Again all was quiet, and continued so for such a length of time that I began to think the contending armies had agreed upon a suspension of hostilities; when pop went a third gun, followed as before with a yell. </span>
      <span id="f1648">After this, for nearly two hours nothing occurred worthy of comment, save some straggling shouts from the hillside, sounding like the halloos of a parcel of truant boys who had lost themselves in the woods.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1649">During this interval I had remained standing on the piazza of the ‘Ti,’ which directly fronted the Happar mountain, and with no one near me but Kory-Kory and the old superannuated savages I have described. </span>
      <span id="f1650">These latter never stirred from their mats, and seemed altogether unconscious that anything unusual was going on.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1651">As for Kory-Kory, he appeared to think that we were in the midst of great events, and sought most zealously to impress me with a due sense of their importance. </span>
      <span id="f1652">Every sound that reached us conveyed some momentous item of intelligence to him. </span>
      <span id="f1653">At such times, as if he were gifted with second sight, he would go through a variety of pantomimic illustrations, showing me the precise manner in which the redoubtable Typees were at that very moment chastising the insolence of the enemy. </span>
      <span id="f1654">‘Mehevi hanna pippee nuee Happar,’ he exclaimed every five minutes, giving me to understand that under that distinguished captain the warriors of his nation were performing prodigies of valour.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1655">Having heard only four reports from the muskets, I was led to believe that they were worked by the islanders in the same manner as the Sultan Solyman’s ponderous artillery at the siege of Byzantium, one of them taking an hour or two to load and train. </span>
      <span id="f1656">At last, no sound whatever proceeding from the mountains, I concluded that the contest had been determined one way or the other. </span>
      <span id="f1657">Such appeared, indeed, to be the case, for in a little while a courier arrived at the ‘Ti’, almost breathless with his exertions, and communicated the news of a great victory having been achieved by his countrymen: ‘Happar poo arva!--Happar poo arva!’ (the cowards had fled). </span>
      <span id="f1658">Kory-Kory was in ecstasies, and commenced a vehement harangue, which, so far as I understood it, implied that the result exactly agreed with his expectations, and which, moreover, was intended to convince me that it would be a perfectly useless undertaking, even for an army of fire-eaters, to offer battle to the irresistible heroes of our valley. </span>
      <span id="f1659">In all this I of course acquiesced, and looked forward with no little interest to the return of the conquerors, whose victory I feared might not have been purchased without cost to themselves.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1660">But here I was again mistaken; for Mehevi, in conducting his warlike operations, rather inclined to the Fabian than to the Bonapartean tactics, husbanding his resources and exposing his troops to no unnecessary hazards. </span>
      <span id="f1661">The total loss of the victors in this obstinately contested affair was, in killed, wounded, and missing--one forefinger and part of a thumb-nail (which the late proprietor brought along with him in his hand), a severely contused arm, and a considerable effusion of blood flowing from the thigh of a chief, who had received an ugly thrust from a Happar spear. </span>
      <span id="f1662">What the enemy had suffered I could not discover, but I presume they had succeeded in taking off with them the bodies of their slain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1663">Such was the issue of the battle, as far as its results came under my observation: and as it appeared to be considered an event of prodigious importance, I reasonably concluded that the wars of the natives were marked by no very sanguinary traits. </span>
      <span id="f1664">I afterwards learned how the skirmish had originated. </span>
      <span id="f1665">A number of the Happars had been discovered prowling for no good purpose on the Typee side of the mountain; the alarm sounded, and the invaders, after a protracted resistance, had been chased over the frontier. </span>
      <span id="f1666">But why had not the intrepid Mehevi carried the war into Happar? </span>
      <span id="f1667">Why had he not made a descent into the hostile vale, and brought away some trophy of his victory--some materials for the cannibal entertainment which I had heard usually terminated every engagement? </span>
      <span id="f1668">After all, I was much inclined to believe that these shocking festivals must occur very rarely among the islanders, if, indeed, they ever take place.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1669">For two or three days the late event was the theme of general comment; after which the excitement gradually wore away, and the valley resumed its accustomed tranquility.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>