<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
      <p>
      <span id="f01670">CHAPTER EIGHTEEN</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01671">SWIMMING IN COMPANY WITH THE GIRLS OF THE VALLEY--A CANOE--EFFECTS OF THE TABOO--A PLEASURE EXCURSION ON THE POND--BEAUTIFUL FREAK OF FAYAWAY--MANTUA-MAKING--A STRANGER ARRIVES IN THE VALLEY--HIS MYSTERIOUS CONDUCT--NATIVE ORATORY--THE INTERVIEW--ITS RESULTS--DEPARTURE OF THE STRANGER</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01672">RETURNING health and peace of mind gave a new interest to everything around me. </span>
      <span id="f01673">I sought to diversify my time by as many enjoyments as lay within my reach. </span>
      <span id="f01674">Bathing in company with troops of girls formed one of my chief amusements. </span>
      <span id="f01675">We sometimes enjoyed the recreation in the waters of a miniature lake, to which the central stream of the valley expanded. </span>
      <span id="f01676">This lovely sheet of water was almost circular in figure, and about three hundred yards across. </span>
      <span id="f01677">Its beauty was indescribable. </span>
      <span id="f01678">All around its banks waved luxuriant masses of tropical foliage, soaring high above which were seen, here and there, the symmetrical shaft of the cocoanut tree, surmounted by its tufts of graceful branches, drooping in the air like so many waving ostrich plumes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01679">The ease and grace with which the maidens of the valley propelled themselves through the water, and their familiarity with the element, were truly astonishing. </span>
      <span id="f01680">Sometimes they might be seen gliding along just under the surface, without apparently moving hand or foot--then throwing themselves on their sides, they darted through the water, revealing glimpses of their forms, as, in the course of their rapid progress, they shot for an instant partly into the air--at one moment they dived deep down into the water, and the next they rose bounding to the surface.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01681">I remember upon one occasion plunging in among a parcel of these river-nymphs, and counting vainly on my superior strength, sought to drag some of them under the water, but I quickly repented my temerity. </span>
      <span id="f01682">The amphibious young creatures swarmed about me like a shoal of dolphins, and seizing hold of my devoted limbs, tumbled me about and ducked me under the surface, until from the strange noises which rang in my ears, and the supernatural visions dancing before my eyes, I thought I was in the land of the spirits. </span>
      <span id="f01683">I stood indeed as little chance among them as a cumbrous whale attacked on all sides by a legion of swordfish. </span>
      <span id="f01684">When at length they relinquished their hold of me, they swam away in every direction, laughing at my clumsy endeavours to reach them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01685">There was no boat on the lake; but at my solicitation and for my special use, some of the young men attached to Marheyo’s household, under the direction of the indefatigable Kory-Kory, brought up a light and tastefully carved canoe from the sea. </span>
      <span id="f01686">It was launched upon the sheet of water, and floated there as gracefully as a swan. </span>
      <span id="f01687">But, melancholy to relate, it produced an effect I had not anticipated. </span>
      <span id="f01688">The sweet nymphs, who had sported with me before on the lake, now all fled its vicinity. </span>
      <span id="f01689">The prohibited craft, guarded by the edicts of the ‘taboo,’ extended the prohibition to the waters in which it lay.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01690">For a few days, Kory-Kory, with one or two other youths, accompanied me in my excursions to the lake, and while I paddled about in my light canoe, would swim after me shouting and gambolling in pursuit. </span>
      <span id="f01691">But I as ever partial to what is termed in the ‘Young Men’s Own Book’--‘the society of virtuous and intelligent young ladies;’ and in the absence of the mermaids, the amusement became dull and insipid. </span>
      <span id="f01692">One morning I expressed to my faithful servitor my desire for the return of the nymphs. </span>
      <span id="f01693">The honest fellow looked at me bewildered for a moment, and then shook his head solemnly, and murmured ‘taboo! </span>
      <span id="f01694">taboo!’ giving me to understand that unless the canoe was removed I could not expect to have the young ladies back again. </span>
      <span id="f01695">But to this procedure I was averse; I not only wanted the canoe to stay where it was, but I wanted the beauteous Fayaway to get into it, and paddle with me about the lake. </span>
      <span id="f01696">This latter proposition completely horrified Kory-Kory’s notions of propriety. </span>
      <span id="f01697">He inveighed against it, as something too monstrous to be thought of. </span>
      <span id="f01698">It not only shocked their established notions of propriety, but was at variance with all their religious ordinances.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01699">However, although the ‘taboo’ was a ticklish thing to meddle with, I determined to test its capabilities of resisting an attack. </span>
      <span id="f01700">I consulted the chief Mehevi, who endeavoured to dissuade me from my object; but I was not to be repulsed; and accordingly increased the warmth of my solicitations. </span>
      <span id="f01701">At last he entered into a long, and I have no doubt a very learned and eloquent exposition of the history and nature of the ‘taboo’ as affecting this particular case; employing a variety of most extraordinary words, which, from their amazing length and sonorousness, I have every reason to believe were of a theological nature. </span>
      <span id="f01702">But all that he said failed to convince me: partly, perhaps, because I could not comprehend a word that he uttered; but chiefly, that for the life of me I could not understand why a woman would not have as much right to enter a canoe as a man. </span>
      <span id="f01703">At last he became a little more rational, and intimated that, out of the abundant love he bore me, he would consult with the priests and see what could be done.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01704">How it was that the priesthood of Typee satisfied the affair with their consciences, I know not; but so it was, and Fayaway dispensation from this portion of the taboo was at length procured. </span>
      <span id="f01705">Such an event I believe never before had occurred in the valley; but it was high time the islanders should be taught a little gallantry, and I trust that the example I set them may produce beneficial effects. </span>
      <span id="f01706">Ridiculous, indeed, that the lovely creatures should be obliged to paddle about in the water, like so many ducks, while a parcel of great strapping fellows skimmed over its surface in their canoes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01707">The first day after Fayaway’s emancipation, I had a delightful little party on the lake--the damsels’ Kory-Kory, and myself. </span>
      <span id="f01708">My zealous body-servant brought from the house a calabash of poee-poee, half a dozen young cocoanuts--stripped of their husks--three pipes, as many yams, and me on his back a part of the way. </span>
      <span id="f01709">Something of a load; but Kory-Kory was a very strong man for his size, and by no means brittle in the spine. </span>
      <span id="f01710">We had a very pleasant day; my trusty valet plied the paddle and swept us gently along the margin of the water, beneath the shades of the overhanging thickets. </span>
      <span id="f01711">Fayaway and I reclined in the stern of the canoe, on the very best terms possible with one another; the gentle nymph occasionally placing her pipe to her lip, and exhaling the mild fumes of the tobacco, to which her rosy breath added a fresh perfume. </span>
      <span id="f01712">Strange as it may seem, there is nothing in which a young and beautiful female appears to more advantage than in the act of smoking. </span>
      <span id="f01713">How captivating is a Peruvian lady, swinging in her gaily-woven hammock of grass, extended between two orange-trees, and inhaling the fragrance of a choice cigarro!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01714">But Fayaway, holding in her delicately formed olive hand the long yellow reed of her pipe, with its quaintly carved bowl, and every few moments languishingly giving forth light wreaths of vapour from her mouth and nostrils, looked still more engaging.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01715">We floated about thus for several hours, when I looked up to the warm, glowing, tropical sky, and then down into the transparent depths below; and when my eye, wandering from the bewitching scenery around, fell upon the grotesquely-tattooed form of Kory-Kory, and finally, encountered the pensive gaze of Fayaway, I thought I had been transported to some fairy region, so unreal did everything appear.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01716">This lovely piece of water was the coolest spot in all the valley, and I now made it a place of continual resort during the hottest period of the day. </span>
      <span id="f01717">One side of it lay near the termination of a long gradually expanding gorge, which mounted to the heights that environed the vale. </span>
      <span id="f01718">The strong trade wind, met in its course by these elevations, circled and eddied about their summits, and was sometimes driven down the steep ravine and swept across the valley, ruffling in its passage the otherwise tranquil surface of the lake.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01719">One day, after we had been paddling about for some time, I disembarked Kory-Kory, and paddled the canoe to the windward side of the lake. </span>
      <span id="f01720">As I turned the canoe, Fayaway, who was with me, seemed all at once to be struck with some happy idea. </span>
      <span id="f01721">With a wild exclamation of delight, she disengaged from her person the ample robe of tappa which was knotted over her shoulder (for the purpose of shielding her from the sun), and spreading it out like a sail, stood erect with upraised arms in the head of the canoe. </span>
      <span id="f01722">We American sailors pride ourselves upon our straight, clean spars, but a prettier little mast than Fayaway made was never shipped aboard of any craft.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01723">In a moment the tappa was distended by the breeze--the long brown tresses of Fayaway streamed in the air--and the canoe glided rapidly through the water, and shot towards the shore. </span>
      <span id="f01724">Seated in the stern, I directed its course with my paddle until it dashed up the soft sloping bank, and Fayaway, with a light spring alighted on the ground; whilst Kory-Kory, who had watched our manoeuvres with admiration, now clapped his hands in transport, and shouted like a madman. </span>
      <span id="f01725">Many a time afterwards was this feat repeated.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01726">If the reader has not observed ere this that I was the declared admirer of Miss Fayaway, all I can say is that he is little conversant with affairs of the heart, and I certainly shall not trouble myself to enlighten him any farther. </span>
      <span id="f01727">Out of the calico I had brought from the ship I made a dress for this lovely girl. </span>
      <span id="f01728">In it she looked, I must confess, something like an opera-dancer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01729">The drapery of the latter damsel generally commences a little above the elbows, but my island beauty’s began at the waist, and terminated sufficiently far above the ground to reveal the most bewitching ankle in the universe.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01730">The day that Fayaway first wore this robe was rendered memorable by a new acquaintance being introduced to me. </span>
      <span id="f01731">In the afternoon I was lying in the house when I heard a great uproar outside; but being by this time pretty well accustomed to the wild halloos which were almost continually ringing through the valley, I paid little attention to it, until old Marheyo, under the influence of some strange excitement, rushed into my presence and communicated the astounding tidings, ‘Marnoo pemi!’ which being interpreted, implied that an individual by the name of Marnoo was approaching.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01732">My worthy old friend evidently expected that this intelligence would produce a great effect upon me, and for a time he stood earnestly regarding me, as if curious to see how I should conduct myself, but as I remained perfectly unmoved, the old gentleman darted out of the house again, in as great a hurry as he had entered it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01733">‘Marnoo, Marnoo,’ cogitated I, ‘I have never heard that name before. </span>
      <span id="f01734">Some distinguished character, I presume, from the prodigious riot the natives are making;’ the tumultuous noise drawing nearer and nearer every moment, while ‘Marnoo!--Marnoo!’ was shouted by every tongue.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01735">I made up my mind that some savage warrior of consequence, who had not yet enjoyed the honour of an audience, was desirous of paying his respects on the present occasion. </span>
      <span id="f01736">So vain had I become by the lavish attention to which I had been accustomed, that I felt half inclined, as a punishment for such neglect, to give this Marnoo a cold reception, when the excited throng came within view, convoying one of the most striking specimens of humanity that I ever beheld.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01737">The stranger could not have been more than twenty-five years of age, and was a little above the ordinary height; had he a single hair’s breadth taller, the matchless symmetry of his form would have been destroyed. </span>
      <span id="f01738">His unclad limbs were beautifully formed; whilst the elegant outline of his figure, together with his beardless cheeks, might have entitled him to the distinction of standing for the statue of the Polynesian Apollo; and indeed the oval of his countenance and the regularity of every feature reminded one of an antique bust. </span>
      <span id="f01739">But the marble repose of art was supplied by a warmth and liveliness of expression only to be seen in the South Sea Islander under the most favourable developments of nature. </span>
      <span id="f01740">The hair of Marnoo was a rich curling brown, and twined about his temples and neck in little close curling ringlets, which danced up and down continually, when he was animated in conversation. </span>
      <span id="f01741">His cheek was of a feminine softness, and his face was free from the least blemish of tattooing, although the rest of his body was drawn all over with fanciful figures, which--unlike the unconnected sketching usual among these natives--appeared to have been executed in conformity with some general design.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01742">The tattooing on his back in particular attracted my attention. </span>
      <span id="f01743">The artist employed must indeed have excelled in his profession. </span>
      <span id="f01744">Traced along the course of the spine was accurately delineated the slender, tapering and diamond checkered shaft of the beautiful ‘artu’ tree. </span>
      <span id="f01745">Branching from the stem on each side, and disposed alternately, were the graceful branches drooping with leaves all correctly drawn and elaborately finished. </span>
      <span id="f01746">Indeed the best specimen of the Fine Arts I had yet seen in Typee. </span>
      <span id="f01747">A rear view of the stranger might have suggested the idea of a spreading vine tacked against a garden wall. </span>
      <span id="f01748">Upon his breast, arms and legs, were exhibited an infinite variety of figures; every one of which, however, appeared to have reference to the general effect sought to be produced. </span>
      <span id="f01749">The tattooing I have described was of the brightest blue, and when contrasted with the light olive-colour of the skin, produced an unique and even elegant effect. </span>
      <span id="f01750">A slight girdle of white tappa, scarcely two inches in width, but hanging before and behind in spreading tassels, composed the entire costume of the stranger.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01751">He advanced surrounded by the islanders, carrying under one arm a small roll of native cloth, and grasping in his other hand a long and richly decorated spear. </span>
      <span id="f01752">His manner was that of a traveller conscious that he is approaching a comfortable stage in his journey. </span>
      <span id="f01753">Every moment he turned good-humouredly on the throng around him, and gave some dashing sort of reply to their incessant queries, which appeared to convulse them with uncontrollable mirth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01754">Struck by his demeanour, and the peculiarity of his appearance, so unlike that of the shaven-crowned and face-tattooed natives in general, I involuntarily rose as he entered the house, and proffered him a seat on the mats beside me. </span>
      <span id="f01755">But without deigning to notice the civility, or even the more incontrovertible fact of my existence, the stranger passed on, utterly regardless of me, and flung himself upon the further end of the long couch that traversed the sole apartment of Marheyo’s habitation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01756">Had the belle of the season, in the pride of her beauty and power, been cut in a place of public resort by some supercilious exquisite, she could not have felt greater indignation than I did at this unexpected slight.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01757">I was thrown into utter astonishment. </span>
      <span id="f01758">The conduct of the savages had prepared me to anticipate from every newcomer the same extravagant expressions of curiosity and regard. </span>
      <span id="f01759">The singularity of his conduct, however, only roused my desire to discover who this remarkable personage might be, who now engrossed the attention of every one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01760">Tinor placed before him a calabash of poee-poee, from which the stranger regaled himself, alternating every mouthful with some rapid exclamation, which was eagerly caught up and echoed by the crowd that completely filled the house. </span>
      <span id="f01761">When I observed the striking devotion of the natives to him, and their temporary withdrawal of all attention from myself, I felt not a little piqued. </span>
      <span id="f01762">The glory of Tommo is departed, thought I, and the sooner he removes from the valley the better. </span>
      <span id="f01763">These were my feelings at the moment, and they were prompted by that glorious principle inherent in all heroic natures--the strong-rooted determination to have the biggest share of the pudding or to go without any of it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01764">Marnoo, that all-attractive personage, having satisfied his hunger and inhaled a few whiffs from a pipe which was handed to him, launched out into an harangue which completely enchained the attention of his auditors.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01765">Little as I understood of the language, yet from his animated gestures and the varying expression of his features--reflected as from so many mirrors in the countenances around him, I could easily discover the nature of those passions which he sought to arouse. </span>
      <span id="f01766">From the frequent recurrence of the words ‘Nukuheva’ and ‘Frannee’ (French), and some others with the meaning of which I was acquainted, he appeared to be rehearsing to his auditors events which had recently occurred in the neighbouring bays. </span>
      <span id="f01767">But how he had gained the knowledge of these matters I could not understand, unless it were that he had just come from Nukuheva--a supposition which his travel-stained appearance not a little supported. </span>
      <span id="f01768">But, if a native of that region, I could not account for his friendly reception at the hands of the Typees.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01769">Never, certainly, had I beheld so powerful an exhibition of natural eloquence as Marnoo displayed during the course of his oration. </span>
      <span id="f01770">The grace of the attitudes into which he threw his flexible figure, the striking gestures of his naked arms, and above all, the fire which shot from his brilliant eyes, imparted an effect to the continually changing accents of his voice, of which the most accomplished orator might have been proud. </span>
      <span id="f01771">At one moment reclining sideways upon the mat, and leaning calmly upon his bended arm, he related circumstantially the aggressions of the French--their hostile visits to the surrounding bays, enumerating each one in succession--Happar, Puerka, Nukuheva, Tior,--and then starting to his feet and precipitating himself forward with clenched hands and a countenance distorted with passion, he poured out a tide of invectives. </span>
      <span id="f01772">Falling back into an attitude of lofty command, he exhorted the Typees to resist these encroachments; reminding them, with a fierce glance of exultation, that as yet the terror of their name had preserved them from attack, and with a scornful sneer he sketched in ironical terms the wondrous intrepidity of the French, who, with five war-canoes and hundreds of men, had not dared to assail the naked warriors of their valley.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01773">The effect he produced upon his audience was electric; one and all they stood regarding him with sparkling eyes and trembling limbs, as though they were listening to the inspired voice of a prophet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01774">But it soon appeared that Marnoo’s powers were as versatile as they were extraordinary. </span>
      <span id="f01775">As soon as he had finished his vehement harangue, he threw himself again upon the mats, and, singling out individuals in the crowd, addressed them by name, in a sort of bantering style, the humour of which, though nearly hidden from me filled the whole assembly with uproarious delight.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01776">He had a word for everybody; and, turning rapidly from one to another, gave utterance to some hasty witticism, which was sure to be followed by peals of laughter. </span>
      <span id="f01777">To the females as well as to the men, he addressed his discourse. </span>
      <span id="f01778">Heaven only knows what he said to them, but he caused smiles and blushes to mantle their ingenuous faces. </span>
      <span id="f01779">I am, indeed, very much inclined to believe that Marnoo, with his handsome person and captivating manners, was a sad deceiver among the simple maidens of the island.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01780">During all this time he had never, for one moment, deigned to regard me. </span>
      <span id="f01781">He appeared, indeed, to be altogether unconscious of my presence. </span>
      <span id="f01782">I was utterly at a loss how to account for this extraordinary conduct. </span>
      <span id="f01783">I easily perceived that he was a man of no little consequence among the islanders; that he possessed uncommon talents; and was gifted with a higher degree of knowledge than the inmates of the valley. </span>
      <span id="f01784">For these reasons, I therefore greatly feared lest having, from some cause or other, unfriendly feelings towards me, he might exert his powerful influence to do me mischief.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01785">It seemed evident that he was not a permanent resident of the vale, and yet, whence could he have come? </span>
      <span id="f01786">On all sides the Typees were girt in by hostile tribes, and how could he possibly, if belonging to any of these, be received with so much cordiality?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01787">The personal appearance of the enigmatical stranger suggested additional perplexities. </span>
      <span id="f01788">The face, free from tattooing, and the unshaven crown, were peculiarities I had never before remarked in any part of the island, and I had always heard that the contrary were considered the indispensable distinction of a Marquesan warrior. </span>
      <span id="f01789">Altogether the matter was perfectly incomprehensible to me, and I awaited its solution with no small degree of anxiety.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01790">At length, from certain indications, I suspected that he was making me the subject of his remarks, although he appeared cautiously to avoid either pronouncing my name, or looking in the direction where I lay. </span>
      <span id="f01791">All at once he rose from the mats where he had been reclining, and, still conversing, moved towards me, his eye purposely evading mine, and seated himself within less than a yard of me. </span>
      <span id="f01792">I had hardly recovered from my surprise, when he suddenly turned round, and, with a most benignant countenance extended his right hand gracefully towards me. </span>
      <span id="f01793">Of course I accepted the courteous challenge, and, as soon as our palms met, he bent towards me, and murmured in musical accents--‘How you do?’ ‘How long you been in this bay?’ ‘You like this bay?’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01794">Had I been pierced simultaneously by three Happar spears, I could not have started more than I did at hearing these simple questions. </span>
      <span id="f01795">For a moment I was overwhelmed with astonishment, and then answered something I know not what; but as soon as I regained my self-possession, the thought darted through my mind that from this individual I might obtain that information regarding Toby which I suspected the natives had purposely withheld from me. </span>
      <span id="f01796">Accordingly I questioned him concerning the disappearance of my companion, but he denied all knowledge of the matter. </span>
      <span id="f01797">I then inquired from whence he had come? </span>
      <span id="f01798">He replied, from Nukuheva. </span>
      <span id="f01799">When I expressed my surprise, he looked at me for a moment, as if enjoying my perplexity, and then with his strange vivacity, exclaimed,--‘Ah! </span>
      <span id="f01800">Me taboo,--me go Nukuheva,--me go Tior,--me go Typee,--me go everywhere,--nobody harm me,--me taboo.’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01801">This explanation would have been altogether unintelligible to me, had it not recalled to my mind something I had previously heard concerning a singular custom among these islanders. </span>
      <span id="f01802">Though the country is possessed by various tribes, whose mutual hostilities almost wholly prelude any intercourse between them; yet there are instances where a person having ratified friendly relations with some individual belonging longing to the valley, whose inmates are at war with his own, may, under particular restrictions, venture with impunity into the country of his friend, where, under other circumstances, he would have been treated as an enemy. </span>
      <span id="f01803">In this light are personal friendships regarded among them, and the individual so protected is said to be ‘taboo’, and his person, to a certain extent, is held as sacred. </span>
      <span id="f01804">Thus the stranger informed me he had access to all the valleys in the island.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01805">Curious to know how he had acquired his knowledge of English, I questioned him on the subject. </span>
      <span id="f01806">At first, for some reason or other, he evaded the inquiry, but afterwards told me that, when a boy, he had been carried to sea by the captain of a trading vessel, with whom he had stayed three years, living part of the time with him at Sidney in Australia, and that at a subsequent visit to the island, the captain had, at his own request, permitted him to remain among his countrymen. </span>
      <span id="f01807">The natural quickness of the savage had been wonderfully improved by his intercourse with the white men, and his partial knowledge of a foreign language gave him a great ascendancy over his less accomplished countrymen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01808">When I asked the now affable Marnoo why it was that he had not previously spoken to me, he eagerly inquired what I had been led to think of him from his conduct in that respect. </span>
      <span id="f01809">I replied, that I had supposed him to be some great chief or warrior, who had seen plenty of white men before, and did not think it worth while to notice a poor sailor. </span>
      <span id="f01810">At this declaration of the exalted opinion I had formed of him, he appeared vastly gratified, and gave me to understand that he had purposely behaved in that manner, in order to increase my astonishment, as soon as he should see proper to address me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01811">Marnoo now sought to learn my version of the story as to how I came to be an inmate of the Typee valley. </span>
      <span id="f01812">When I related to him the circumstances under which Toby and I had entered it, he listened with evident interest; but as soon as I alluded to the absence, yet unaccounted for, of my comrade, he endeavoured to change the subject, as if it were something he desired not to agitate. </span>
      <span id="f01813">It seemed, indeed, as if everything connected with Toby was destined to beget distrust and anxiety in my bosom. </span>
      <span id="f01814">Notwithstanding Marnoo’s denial of any knowledge of his fate, I could not avoid suspecting that he was deceiving me; and this suspicion revived those frightful apprehensions with regard to my own fate, which, for a short time past, had subsided in my breast.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01815">Influenced by these feelings, I now felt a strong desire to avail myself of the stranger’s protection, and under his safeguard to return to Nukuheva. </span>
      <span id="f01816">But as soon as I hinted at this, he unhesitatingly pronounced it to be entirely impracticable; assuring me that the Typees would never consent to my leaving the valley. </span>
      <span id="f01817">Although what he said merely confirmed the impression which I had before entertained, still it increased my anxiety to escape from a captivity which, however endurable, nay, delightful it might be in some respects, involved in its issues a fate marked by the most frightful contingencies.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01818">I could not conceal from my mind that Toby had been treated in the same friendly manner as I had been, and yet all their kindness terminated with his mysterious disappearance. </span>
      <span id="f01819">Might not the same fate await me?--a fate too dreadful to think of. </span>
      <span id="f01820">Stimulated by these considerations, I urged anew my request to Marnoo; but he only set forth in stronger colours the impossibility of my escape, and repeated his previous declaration that the Typees would never be brought to consent to my departure.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01821">When I endeavoured to learn from him the motives which prompted them to hold me a prisoner, Marnoo again presumed that mysterious tone which had tormented me with apprehension when I had questioned him with regard to the fate of my companion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01822">Thus repulsed, in a manner which only served, by arousing the most dreadful forebodings, to excite me to renewed attempts, I conjured him to intercede for me with the natives, and endeavour to procure their consent to my leaving them. </span>
      <span id="f01823">To this he appeared strongly averse; but, yielding at last to my importunities, he addressed several of the chiefs, who with the rest had been eyeing us intently during the whole of our conversation. </span>
      <span id="f01824">His petition, however, was at once met with the most violent disapprobation, manifesting itself in angry glances and gestures, and a perfect torrent of passionate words, directed to both him and myself. </span>
      <span id="f01825">Marnoo, evidently repenting the step he had taken, earnestly deprecated the resentment of the crowd, and, in a few moments succeeded in pacifying to some extent the clamours which had broken out as soon as his proposition had been understood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01826">With the most intense interest had I watched the reception his intercession might receive; and a bitter pang shot through my heart at the additional evidence, now furnished, of the unchangeable determination of the islanders. </span>
      <span id="f01827">Marnoo told me with evident alarm in his countenance, that although admitted into the bay on a friendly footing with its inhabitants, he could not presume to meddle with their concerns, as such procedure, if persisted in, would at once absolve the Typees from the restraints of the ‘taboo’, although so long as he refrained from such conduct, it screened him effectually from the consequences of the enmity they bore his tribe. </span>
      <span id="f01828">At this moment, Mehevi, who was present, angrily interrupted him; and the words which he uttered in a commanding tone, evidently meant that he must at once cease talking to me and withdraw to the other part of the house. </span>
      <span id="f01829">Marnoo immediately started up, hurriedly enjoining me not to address him again, and as I valued my safety, to refrain from all further allusion to the subject of my departure; and then, in compliance with the order of the determined chief, but not before it had again been angrily repeated, he withdrew to a distance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01830">I now perceived, with no small degree of apprehension, the same savage expression in the countenances of the natives, which had startled me during the scene at the Ti. </span>
      <span id="f01831">They glanced their eyes suspiciously from Marnoo to me, as if distrusting the nature of an intercourse carried on, as it was, in a language they could not understand, and they seemed to harbour the belief that already we had concerted measures calculated to elude their vigilance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01832">The lively countenances of these people are wonderfully indicative of the emotions of the soul, and the imperfections of their oral language are more than compensated for by the nervous eloquence of their looks and gestures. </span>
      <span id="f01833">I could plainly trace, in every varying expression of their faces, all those passions which had been thus unexpectedly aroused in their bosoms.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01834">It required no reflection to convince me, from what was going on, that the injunction of Marnoo was not to be rashly slighted; and accordingly, great as was the effort to suppress my feelings, I accosted Mehevi in a good-humoured tone, with a view of dissipating any ill impression he might have received. </span>
      <span id="f01835">But the ireful, angry chief was not so easily mollified. </span>
      <span id="f01836">He rejected my advances with that peculiarly stern expression I have before described, and took care by the whole of his behaviour towards me to show the displeasure and resentment which he felt.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f01837">Marnoo, at the other extremity of the house, apparently desirous of making a diversion in my favour, exerted himself to amuse with his pleasantries the crowd about him; but his lively attempts were not so successful as they had previously been, and, foiled in his efforts, he rose gravely to depart. </span>
      <span id="f01838">No one expressed any regret at this movement, so seizing his roll of tappa, and grasping his spear, he advanced to the front of the pi-pi, and waving his hand in adieu to the now silent throng, cast upon me a glance of mingled pity and reproach, and flung himself into the path which led from the house. </span>
      <span id="f01839">I watched his receding figure until it was lost in the obscurity of the grove, and then gave myself up to the most desponding reflections.</span>
      </p>
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>