<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER NINETEEN</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1840">CHAPTER NINETEEN</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1841">REFLECTIONS AFTER MARNOO’S DEPARTURE-BATTLE OF THE POP-GUNS--STRANGE CONCEIT OF MARHEYO--PROCESS OF MAKING TAPPA</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1842">THE knowledge I had now obtained as to the intention of the savages deeply affected me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1843">Marnoo, I perceived, was a man who, by reason of his superior acquirements, and the knowledge he possessed of the events which were taking place in the different bays of the island, was held in no little estimation by the inhabitants of the valley. </span>
      <span id="f1844">He had been received with the most cordial welcome and respect. </span>
      <span id="f1845">The natives had hung upon the accents of his voice, and, had manifested the highest gratification at being individually noticed by him. </span>
      <span id="f1846">And yet despite all this, a few words urged in my behalf, with the intent of obtaining my release from captivity, had sufficed not only to banish all harmony and good-will; but, if I could believe what he told me, had gone on to endanger his own personal safety.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1847">How strongly rooted, then, must be the determination of the Typees with regard to me, and how suddenly could they display the strangest passions! </span>
      <span id="f1848">The mere suggestion of my departure had estranged from me, for the time at least, Mehevi, who was the most influential of all the chiefs, and who had previously exhibited so many instances of his friendly sentiments. </span>
      <span id="f1849">The rest of the natives had likewise evinced their strong repugnance to my wishes, and even Kory-Kory himself seemed to share in the general disapprobation bestowed upon me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1850">In vain I racked my invention to find out some motive for them, but I could discover none.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1851">But however this might be, the scene which had just occurred admonished me of the danger of trifling with the wayward and passionate spirits against whom it was vain to struggle, and might even be fatal to do go. </span>
      <span id="f1852">My only hope was to induce the natives to believe that I was reconciled to my detention in the valley, and by assuming a tranquil and cheerful demeanour, to allay the suspicions which I had so unfortunately aroused. </span>
      <span id="f1853">Their confidence revived, they might in a short time remit in some degree their watchfulness over my movements, and I should then be the better enabled to avail myself of any opportunity which presented itself for escape. </span>
      <span id="f1854">I determined, therefore, to make the best of a bad bargain, and to bear up manfully against whatever might betide. </span>
      <span id="f1855">In this endeavour, I succeeded beyond my own expectations. </span>
      <span id="f1856">At the period of Marnoo’s visit, I had been in the valley, as nearly as I could conjecture, some two months. </span>
      <span id="f1857">Although not completely recovered from my strange illness, which still lingered about me, I was free from pain and able to take exercise. </span>
      <span id="f1858">In short, I had every reason to anticipate a perfect recovery. </span>
      <span id="f1859">Freed from apprehension on this point, and resolved to regard the future without flinching, I flung myself anew into all the social pleasures of the valley, and sought to bury all regrets, and all remembrances of my previous existence in the wild enjoyments it afforded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1860">In my various wanderings through the vale, and as I became better acquainted with the character of its inhabitants, I was more and more struck with the light-hearted joyousness that everywhere prevailed. </span>
      <span id="f1861">The minds of these simple savages, unoccupied by matters of graver moment, were capable of deriving the utmost delight from circumstances which would have passed unnoticed in more intelligent communities. </span>
      <span id="f1862">All their enjoyment, indeed, seemed to be made up of the little trifling incidents of the passing hour; but these diminutive items swelled altogether to an amount of happiness seldom experienced by more enlightened individuals, whose pleasures are drawn from more elevated but rarer sources.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1863">What community, for instance, of refined and intellectual mortals would derive the least satisfaction from shooting pop-guns? </span>
      <span id="f1864">The mere supposition of such a thing being possible would excite their indignation, and yet the whole population of Typee did little else for ten days but occupy themselves with that childish amusement, fairly screaming, too, with the delight it afforded them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1865">One day I was frolicking with a little spirited urchin, some six years old, who chased me with a piece of bamboo about three feet long, with which he occasionally belaboured me. </span>
      <span id="f1866">Seizing the stick from him, the idea happened to suggest itself, that I might make for the youngster, out of the slender tube, one of those nursery muskets with which I had sometimes seen children playing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1867">Accordingly, with my knife I made two parallel slits in the cane several inches in length, and cutting loose at one end the elastic strip between them, bent it back and slipped the point into a little notch made for the purse. </span>
      <span id="f1868">Any small substance placed against this would be projected with considerable force through the tube, by merely springing the bent strip out of the notch.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1869">Had I possessed the remotest idea of the sensation this piece of ordnance was destined to produce, I should certainly have taken out a patent for the invention. </span>
      <span id="f1870">The boy scampered away with it, half delirious with ecstasy, and in twenty minutes afterwards I might have been seen surrounded by a noisy crowd--venerable old graybeards--responsible fathers of families--valiant warriors--matrons--young men--girls and children, all holding in their hands bits of bamboo, and each clamouring to be served first.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1871">For three or four hours I was engaged in manufacturing pop-guns, but at last made over my good-will and interest in the concern to a lad of remarkably quick parts, whom I soon initiated into the art and mystery.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1872">Pop, Pop, Pop, Pop, now resounded all over the valley. </span>
      <span id="f1873">Duels, skirmishes, pitched battles, and general engagements were to be seen on every side. </span>
      <span id="f1874">Here, as you walked along a path which led through a thicket, you fell into a cunningly laid ambush, and became a target for a body of musketeers whose tattooed limbs you could just see peeping into view through the foliage. </span>
      <span id="f1875">There you were assailed by the intrepid garrison of a house, who levelled their bamboo rifles at you from between the upright canes which composed its sides. </span>
      <span id="f1876">Farther on you were fired upon by a detachment of sharpshooters, mounted upon the top of a pi-pi.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1877">Pop, Pop, Pop, Pop! </span>
      <span id="f1878">green guavas, seeds, and berries were flying about in every direction, and during this dangerous state of affairs I was half afraid that, like the man and his brazen bull, I should fall a victim to my own ingenuity. </span>
      <span id="f1879">Like everything else, however, the excitement gradually wore away, though ever after occasionally pop-guns might be heard at all hours of the day.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1880">It was towards the close of the pop-gun war, that I was infinitely diverted with a strange freak of Marheyo’s.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1881">I had worn, when I quitted the ship, a pair of thick pumps, which, from the rough usage they had received in scaling precipices and sliding down gorges, were so dilapidated as to be altogether unfit for use--so, at least, would have thought the generality of people, and so they most certainly were, when considered in the light of shoes. </span>
      <span id="f1882">But things unservicable in one way, may with advantage be applied in another, that is, if one have genius enough for the purpose. </span>
      <span id="f1883">This genius Marheyo possessed in a superlative degree, as he abundantly evinced by the use to which he put those sorely bruised and battered old shoes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1884">Every article, however trivial, which belonged to me, the natives appeared to regard as sacred; and I observed that for several days after becoming an inmate of the house, my pumps were suffered to remain, untouched, where I had first happened to throw them. </span>
      <span id="f1885">I remembered, however, that after awhile I had missed them from their accustomed place; but the matter gave me no concern, supposing that Tinor--like any other tidy housewife, having come across them in some of her domestic occupations--had pitched the useless things out of the house. </span>
      <span id="f1886">But I was soon undeceived.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1887">One day I observed old Marheyo bustling about me with unusual activity, and to such a degree as almost to supersede Kory-Kory in the functions of his office. </span>
      <span id="f1888">One moment he volunteered to trot off with me on his back to the stream; and when I refused, noways daunted by the repulse, he continued to frisk about me like a superannuated house-dog. </span>
      <span id="f1889">I could not for the life of me conjecture what possessed the old gentleman, until all at once, availing himself of the temporary absence of the household, he went through a variety of of uncouth gestures, pointing eagerly down to my feet, then up to a little bundle, which swung from the ridge pole overhead. </span>
      <span id="f1890">At last I caught a faint idea of his meaning, and motioned him to lower the package. </span>
      <span id="f1891">He executed the order in the twinkling of an eye, and unrolling a piece of tappa, displayed to my astonished gaze the identical pumps which I thought had been destroyed long before.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1892">I immediately comprehended his desire, and very generously gave him the shoes, which had become quite mouldy, wondering for what earthly purpose he could want them. </span>
      <span id="f1893">The same afternoon I descried the venerable warrior approaching the house, with a slow, stately gait, ear-rings in ears, and spear in hand, with this highly ornamental pair of shoes suspended from his neck by a strip of bark, and swinging backwards and forwards on his capacious chest. </span>
      <span id="f1894">In the gala costume of the tasteful Marheyo, these calf-skin pendants ever after formed the most striking feature.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1895">But to turn to something a little more important. </span>
      <span id="f1896">Although the whole existence of the inhabitants of the valley seemed to pass away exempt from toil, yet there were some light employments which, although amusing rather than laborious as occupations, contributed to their comfort and luxury. </span>
      <span id="f1897">Among these the most important was the manufacture of the native cloth,--‘tappa’,--so well known, under various modifications, throughout the whole Polynesian Archipelago. </span>
      <span id="f1898">As is generally understood, this useful and sometimes elegant article is fabricated from the bark of different trees. </span>
      <span id="f1899">But, as I believe that no description of its manufacture has ever been given, I shall state what I know regarding it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1900">In the manufacture of the beautiful white tappa generally worn on the Marquesan Islands, the preliminary operation consists in gathering a certain quantity of the young branches of the cloth-tree. </span>
      <span id="f1901">The exterior green bark being pulled off as worthless, there remains a slender fibrous substance, which is carefully stripped from the stick, to which it closely adheres. </span>
      <span id="f1902">When a sufficient quantity of it has been collected, the various strips are enveloped in a covering of large leaves, which the natives use precisely as we do wrapping-paper, and which are secured by a few turns of a line passed round them. </span>
      <span id="f1903">The package is then laid in the bed of some running stream, with a heavy stone placed over it, to prevent its being swept away. </span>
      <span id="f1904">After it has remained for two or three days in this state, it is drawn out, and exposed, for a short time, to the action of the air, every distinct piece being attentively inspected, with a view of ascertaining whether it has yet been sufficiently affected by the operation. </span>
      <span id="f1905">This is repeated again and again, until the desired result is obtained.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1906">When the substance is in a proper state for the next process, it betrays evidences of incipient decomposition; the fibres are relaxed and softened, and rendered perfectly malleable. </span>
      <span id="f1907">The different strips are now extended, one by one, in successive layers, upon some smooth surface--generally the prostrate trunk of a cocoanut tree--and the heap thus formed is subjected, at every new increase, to a moderate beating, with a sort of wooden mallet, leisurely applied. </span>
      <span id="f1908">The mallet is made of a hard heavy wood resembling ebony, is about twelve inches in length, and perhaps two in breadth, with a rounded handle at one end, and in shape is the exact counterpart of one of our four-sided razor-strops. </span>
      <span id="f1909">The flat surfaces of the implement are marked with shallow parallel indentations, varying in depth on the different sides, so as to be adapted to the several stages of the operation. </span>
      <span id="f1910">These marks produce the corduroy sort of stripes discernible in the tappa in its finished state. </span>
      <span id="f1911">After being beaten in the manner I have described, the material soon becomes blended in one mass, which, moistened occasionally with water, is at intervals hammered out, by a kind of gold-beating process, to any degree of thinness required. </span>
      <span id="f1912">In this way the cloth is easily made to vary in strength and thickness, so as to suit the numerous purposes to which it is applied.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1913">When the operation last described has been concluded, the new-made tappa is spread out on the grass to bleach and dry, and soon becomes of a dazzling whiteness. </span>
      <span id="f1914">Sometimes, in the first stages of the manufacture, the substance is impregnated with a vegetable juice, which gives it a permanent colour. </span>
      <span id="f1915">A rich brown and a bright yellow are occasionally seen, but the simple taste of the Typee people inclines them to prefer the natural tint.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1916">The notable wife of Kamehameha, the renowned conqueror and king of the Sandwich Islands, used to pride herself in the skill she displayed in dyeing her tappa with contrasting colours disposed in regular figures; and, in the midst of the innovations of the times, was regarded, towards the decline of her life, as a lady of the old school, clinging as she did to the national cloth, in preference to the frippery of the European calicoes. </span>
      <span id="f1917">But the art of printing the tappa is unknown upon the Marquesan Islands. </span>
      <span id="f1918">In passing along the valley, I was often attracted by the noise of the mallet, which, when employed in the manufacture of the cloth produces at every stroke of its hard, heavy wood, a clear, ringing, and musical sound, capable of being heard at a great distance. </span>
      <span id="f1919">When several of these implements happen to be in operation at the same time, near one another, the effect upon the ear of a person, at a little distance, is really charming.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>