<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER TWENTY</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1920">CHAPTER TWENTY</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1921">HISTORY OF A DAY AS USUALLY SPENT IN TYPEE VALLEY--DANCES OF THE MARQUESAN GIRLS</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1922">NOTHING can be more uniform and undiversified than the life of the Typees; one tranquil day of ease and happiness follows another in quiet succession; and with these unsophisicated savages the history of a day is the history of a life. </span>
      <span id="f1923">I will, therefore, as briefly as I can, describe one of our days in the valley.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1924">To begin with the morning. </span>
      <span id="f1925">We were not very early risers--the sun would be shooting his golden spikes above the Happar mountain, ere I threw aside my tappa robe, and girding my long tunic about my waist, sallied out with Fayaway and Kory-Kory, and the rest of the household, and bent my steps towards the stream. </span>
      <span id="f1926">Here we found congregated all those who dwelt in our section of the valley; and here we bathed with them. </span>
      <span id="f1927">The fresh morning air and the cool flowing waters put both soul and body in a glow, and after a half-hour employed in this recreation, we sauntered back to the house--Tinor and Marheyo gathering dry sticks by the way for fire-wood; some of the young men laying the cocoanut trees under contribution as they passed beneath them; while Kory-Kory played his outlandish pranks for my particular diversion, and Fayaway and I, not arm in arm to be sure, but sometimes hand in hand, strolled along, with feelings of perfect charity for all the world, and especial good-will towards each other.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1928">Our morning meal was soon prepared. </span>
      <span id="f1929">The islanders are somewhat abstemious at this repast; reserving the more powerful efforts of their appetite to a later period of the day. </span>
      <span id="f1930">For my own part, with the assistance of my valet, who, as I have before stated, always officiated as spoon on these occasions, I ate sparingly from one of Tinor’s trenchers, of poee-poee; which was devoted exclusively for my own use, being mixed with the milky meat of ripe cocoanut. </span>
      <span id="f1931">A section of a roasted bread-fruit, a small cake of ‘Amar’, or a mess of ‘Cokoo,’ two or three bananas, or a mammee-apple; an annuee, or some other agreeable and nutritious fruit served from day to day to diversify the meal, which was finished by tossing off the liquid contents of a young cocoanut or two.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1932">While partaking of this simple repast, the inmates of Marheyo’s house, after the style of the ancient Romans, reclined in sociable groups upon the divan of mats, and digestion was promoted by cheerful conversation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1933">After the morning meal was concluded, pipes were lighted; and among them my own especial pipe, a present from the noble Mehevi.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1934">The islanders, who only smoke a whiff or two at a time, and at long intervals, and who keep their pipes going from hand to hand continually, regarded my systematic smoking of four or five pipefuls of tobacco in succession, as something quite wonderful. </span>
      <span id="f1935">When two or three pipes had circulated freely, the company gradually broke up. </span>
      <span id="f1936">Marheyo went to the little hut he was forever building. </span>
      <span id="f1937">Tinor began to inspect her rolls of tappa, or employed her busy fingers in plaiting grass-mats. </span>
      <span id="f1938">The girls anointed themselves with their fragrant oils, dressed their hair, or looked over their curious finery, and compared together their ivory trinkets, fashioned out of boar’s tusks or whale’s teeth. </span>
      <span id="f1939">The young men and warriors produced their spears, paddles, canoe-gear, battle-clubs, and war-conchs, and occupied themselves in carving, all sorts of figures upon them with pointed bits of shell or flint, and adorning them, especially the war-conchs, with tassels of braided bark and tufts of human hair. </span>
      <span id="f1940">Some, immediately after eating, threw themselves once more upon the inviting mats, and resumed the employment of the previous night, sleeping as soundly as if they had not closed their eyes for a week. </span>
      <span id="f1941">Others sallied out into the groves, for the purpose of gathering fruit or fibres of bark and leaves; the last two being in constant requisition, and applied to a hundred uses. </span>
      <span id="f1942">A few, perhaps, among the girls, would slip into the woods after flowers, or repair to the stream will; small calabashes and cocoanut shells, in order to polish them by friction with a smooth stone in the water. </span>
      <span id="f1943">In truth these innocent people seemed to be at no loss for something to occupy their time; and it would be no light task to enumerate all their employments, or rather pleasures.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1944">My own mornings I spent in a variety of ways. </span>
      <span id="f1945">Sometimes I rambled about from house to house, sure of receiving a cordial welcome wherever I went; or from grove to grove, and from one shady place to another, in company with Kory-Kory and Fayaway, and a rabble rout of merry young idlers. </span>
      <span id="f1946">Sometimes I was too indolent for exercise, and accepting one of the many invitations I was continually receiving, stretched myself out on the mats of some hospitable dwelling, and occupied myself pleasantly either in watching the proceedings of those around me or taking part in them myself. </span>
      <span id="f1947">Whenever I chose to do the latter, the delight of the islanders was boundless; and there was always a throng of competitors for the honour of instructing me in any particular craft. </span>
      <span id="f1948">I soon became quite an accomplished hand at making tappa--could braid a grass sling as well as the best of them--and once, with my knife, carved the handle of a javelin so exquisitely, that I have no doubt, to this day, Karnoonoo, its owner, preserves it as a surprising specimen of my skill. </span>
      <span id="f1949">As noon approached, all those who had wandered forth from our habitation, began to return; and when midday was fairly come scarcely a sound was to be heard in the valley: a deep sleep fell upon all. </span>
      <span id="f1950">The luxurious siesta was hardly ever omitted, except by old Marheyo, who was so eccentric a character, that he seemed to be governed by no fixed principles whatever; but acting just according to the humour of the moment, slept, ate, or tinkered away at his little hut, without regard to the proprieties of time or place. </span>
      <span id="f1951">Frequently he might have been seen taking a nap in the sun at noon-day, or a bath in the stream of mid-night. </span>
      <span id="f1952">Once I beheld him perched eighty feet from the ground, in the tuft of a cocoanut tree, smoking; and often I saw him standing up to the waist in water, engaged in plucking out the stray hairs of his beard, using a piece of muscle-shell for tweezers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1953">The noon-tide slumber lasted generally an hour and a half: very often longer; and after the sleepers had arisen from their mats they again had recourse to their pipes, and then made preparations for the most important meal of the day.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1954">I, however, like those gentlemen of leisure who breakfast at home and dine at their club, almost invariably, during my intervals of health, enjoyed the afternoon repast with the bachelor chiefs of the Ti, who were always rejoiced to see me, and lavishly spread before me all the good things which their larder afforded. </span>
      <span id="f1955">Mehevi generally introduced among other dainties a baked pig, an article which I have every reason to suppose was provided for my sole gratification.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1956">The Ti was a right jovial place. </span>
      <span id="f1957">It did my heart, as well as my body, good to visit it. </span>
      <span id="f1958">Secure from female intrusion, there was no restraint upon the hilarity of the warriors, who, like the gentlemen of Europe after the cloth is drawn and the ladies retire, freely indulged their mirth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1959">After spending a considerable portion of the afternoon at the Ti, I usually found myself, as the cool of the evening came on, either sailing on the little lake with Fayaway, or bathing in the waters of the stream with a number of the savages, who, at this hour, always repaired thither. </span>
      <span id="f1960">As the shadows of night approached Marheyo’s household were once more assembled under his roof: tapers were lit, long curious chants were raised, interminable stories were told (for which one present was little the wiser), and all sorts of social festivities served to while away the time.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1961">The young girls very often danced by moonlight in front of their dwellings. </span>
      <span id="f1962">There are a great variety of these dances, in which, however, I never saw the men take part. </span>
      <span id="f1963">They all consist of active, romping, mischievous evolutions, in which every limb is brought into requisition. </span>
      <span id="f1964">Indeed, the Marquesan girls dance all over, as it were; not only do their feet dance, but their arms, hands, fingers, ay, their very eyes, seem to dance in their heads.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1965">The damsels wear nothing but flowers and their compendious gala tunics; and when they plume themselves for the dance, they look like a band of olive-coloured Sylphides on the point of taking wing. </span>
      <span id="f1966">In good sooth, they so sway their floating forms, arch their necks, toss aloft their naked arms, and glide, and swim, and whirl, that it was almost too much for a quiet, sober-minded, modest young man like myself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1967">Unless some particular festivity was going forward, the inmates of Marheyo’s house retired to their mats rather early in the evening; but not for the night, since, after slumbering lightly for a while, they rose again, relit their tapers, partook of the third and last meal of the day, at which poee-poee alone was eaten, and then, after inhaling a narcotic whiff from a pipe of tobacco, disposed themselves for the great business of night, sleep. </span>
      <span id="f1968">With the Marquesans it might almost most be styled the great business of life, for they pass a large portion of their time in the arms of Somnus. </span>
      <span id="f1969">The native strength of their constitution is no way shown more emphatically than in the quantity of sleep they can endure. </span>
      <span id="f1970">To many of them, indeed, life is little else than an often interrupted and luxurious nap.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>