<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f2022">CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f2023">PREPARATIONS FOR A GRAND FESTIVAL IN THE VALLEY--STRANGE DOINGS IN THE TABOO GROVES--MONUMENT OF CALABASHES--GALA COSTUME OF THE TYPEE DAMSELS--DEPARTURE FOR THE FESTIVAL</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2024">FROM the time that my lameness had decreased I had made a daily practice of visiting Mehevi at the Ti, who invariably gave me a most cordial reception. </span>
      <span id="f2025">I was always accompanied in these excursions by Fayaway and the ever-present Kory-Kory. </span>
      <span id="f2026">The former, as soon as we reached the vicinity of the Ti--which was rigorously tabooed to the whole female sex--withdrew to a neighbouring hut, as if her feminine delicacy ‘restricted’ her from approaching a habitation which might be regarded as a sort of Bachelor’s Hall.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2027">And in good truth it might well have been so considered. </span>
      <span id="f2028">Although it was the permanent residence of several distinguished chiefs, and of the noble Mehevi in particular, it was still at certain seasons the favourite haunt of all the jolly, talkative, and elderly savages of the vale, who resorted thither in the same way that similar characters frequent a tavern in civilized countries. </span>
      <span id="f2029">There they would remain hour after hour, chatting, smoking, eating poee-poee, or busily engaged in sleeping for the good of their constitutions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2030">This building appeared to be the head-quarters of the valley, where all flying rumours concentrated; and to have seen it filled with a crowd of the natives, all males, conversing in animated clusters, while multitudes were continually coming and going, one would have thought it a kind of savage Exchange, where the rise and fall of Polynesian Stock was discussed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2031">Mehevi acted as supreme lord over the place, spending the greater portion of his time there: and often when, at particular hours of the day, it was deserted by nearly every one else except the verd-antique looking centenarians, who were fixtures in the building, the chief himself was sure to be found enjoying his ‘otium cum dignitate’--upon the luxurious mats which covered the floor. </span>
      <span id="f2032">Whenever I made my appearance he invariably rose, and like a gentleman doing the honours of his mansion, invited me to repose myself wherever I pleased, and calling out ‘tamaree!’ (boy), a little fellow would appear, and then retiring for an instant, return with some savoury mess, from which the chief would press me to regale myself. </span>
      <span id="f2033">To tell the truth, Mehevi was indebted to the excellence of his viands for the honour of my repeated visits--a matter which cannot appear singular, when it is borne in mind that bachelors, all the world over, are famous for serving up unexceptionable repasts.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2034">One day, on drawing near to the Ti, I observed that extensive preparations were going forward, plainly betokening some approaching festival. </span>
      <span id="f2035">Some of the symptoms reminded me of the stir produced among the scullions of a large hotel, where a grand jubilee dinner is about to be given. </span>
      <span id="f2036">The natives were hurrying about hither and thither, engaged in various duties, some lugging off to the stream enormous hollow bamboos, for the purpose of filling them with water; others chasing furious-looking hogs through the bushes, in their endeavours to capture them; and numbers employed in kneading great mountains of poee-poee heaped up in huge wooden vessels.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2037">After observing these lively indications for a while, I was attracted to a neighbouring grove by a prodigious squeaking which I heard there. </span>
      <span id="f2038">On reaching the spot I found it proceeded from a large hog which a number of natives were forcibly holding to the earth, while a muscular fellow, armed with a bludgeon, was ineffectually aiming murderous blows at the skull of the unfortunate porker. </span>
      <span id="f2039">Again and again he missed his writhing and struggling victim, but though puffing and panting with his exertions, he still continued them; and after striking a sufficient number of blows to have demolished an entire drove of oxen, with one crashing stroke he laid him dead at his feet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2040">Without letting any blood from the body, it was immediately carried to a fire which had been kindled near at hand and four savages taking hold of the carcass by its legs, passed it rapidly to and fro in the flames. </span>
      <span id="f2041">In a moment the smell of burning bristles betrayed the object of this procedure. </span>
      <span id="f2042">Having got thus far in the matter, the body was removed to a little distance and, being disembowelled, the entrails were laid aside as choice parts, and the whole carcass thoroughly washed with water. </span>
      <span id="f2043">An ample thick green cloth, composed of the long thick leaves of a species of palm-tree, ingeniously tacked together with little pins of bamboo, was now spread upon the ground, in which the body being carefully rolled, it was borne to an oven previously prepared to receive it. </span>
      <span id="f2044">Here it was at once laid upon the heated stones at the bottom, and covered with thick layers of leaves, the whole being quickly hidden from sight by a mound of earth raised over it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2045">Such is the summary style in which the Typees convert perverse-minded and rebellious hogs into the most docile and amiable pork; a morsel of which placed on the tongue melts like a soft smile from the lips of Beauty.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2046">I commend their peculiar mode of proceeding to the consideration of all butchers, cooks, and housewives. </span>
      <span id="f2047">The hapless porker whose fate I have just rehearsed, was not the only one who suffered in that memorable day. </span>
      <span id="f2048">Many a dismal grunt, many an imploring squeak, proclaimed what was going on throughout the whole extent of the valley; and I verily believe the first-born of every litter perished before the setting of that fatal sun.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2049">The scene around the Ti was now most animated. </span>
      <span id="f2050">Hogs and poee-poee were baking in numerous ovens, which, heaped up with fresh earth into slight elevations, looked like so many ant-hills. </span>
      <span id="f2051">Scores of the savages were vigorously plying their stone pestles in preparing masses of poee-poee, and numbers were gathering green bread-fruit and young cocoanuts in the surrounding groves; when an exceeding great multitude, with a view of encouraging the rest in their labours, stood still, and kept shouting most lustily without intermission.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2052">It is a peculiarity among these people, that, when engaged in an employment, they always make a prodigious fuss about it. </span>
      <span id="f2053">So seldom do they ever exert themselves, that when they do work they seem determined that so meritorious an action shall not escape the observation of those around if, for example, they have occasion to remove a stone to a little distance, which perhaps might be carried by two able-bodied men, a whole swarm gather about it, and, after a vast deal of palavering, lift it up among them, every one struggling to get hold of it, and bear it off yelling and panting as if accomplishing some mighty achievement. </span>
      <span id="f2054">Seeing them on these occasions, one is reminded of an infinity of black ants clustering about and dragging away to some hole the leg of a deceased fly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2055">Having for some time attentively observed these demonstrations of good cheer, I entered the Ti, where Mehevi sat complacently looking out upon the busy scene, and occasionally issuing his orders. </span>
      <span id="f2056">The chief appeared to be in an extraordinary flow of spirits and gave me to understand that on the morrow there would be grand doings in the Groves generally, and at the Ti in particular; and urged me by no means to absent myself. </span>
      <span id="f2057">In commemoration of what event, however, or in honour of what distinguished personage, the feast was to be given, altogether passed my comprehension. </span>
      <span id="f2058">Mehevi sought to enlighten my ignorance, but he failed as signally as when he had endeavoured to initiate me into the perplexing arcana of the taboo.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2059">On leaving the Ti, Kory-Kory, who had as a matter of course accompanied me, observing that my curiosity remained unabated, resolved to make everything plain and satisfactory. </span>
      <span id="f2060">With this intent, he escorted me through the Taboo Groves, pointing out to my notice a variety of objects, and endeavoured to explain them in such an indescribable jargon of words, that it almost put me in bodily pain to listen to him. </span>
      <span id="f2061">In particular, he led me to a remarkable pyramidical structure some three yards square at the base, and perhaps ten feet in height, which had lately been thrown up, and occupied a very conspicuous position. </span>
      <span id="f2062">It was composed principally of large empty calabashes, with a few polished cocoanut shells, and looked not unlike a cenotaph of skulls. </span>
      <span id="f2063">My cicerone perceived the astonishment with which I gazed at this monument of savage crockery, and immediately addressed himself in the task of enlightening me: but all in vain; and to this hour the nature of the monument remains a complete mystery to me. </span>
      <span id="f2064">As, however, it formed so prominent a feature in the approaching revels, I bestowed upon the latter, in my own mind, the title of the ‘Feast of Calabashes’.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2065">The following morning, awaking rather late, I perceived the whole of Marheyo’s family busily engaged in preparing for the festival.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2066">The old warrior himself was arranging in round balls the two grey locks of hair that were suffered to grow from the crown of his head; his earrings and spear, both well polished, lay beside him, while the highly decorative pair of shoes hung suspended from a projecting cane against the side of the house. </span>
      <span id="f2067">The young men were similarly employed; and the fair damsels, including Fayaway, were anointing themselves with ‘aka’, arranging their long tresses, and performing other matters connected with the duties of the toilet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2068">Having completed their preparations, the girls now exhibited themselves in gala costume; the most conspicuous feature of which was a necklace of beautiful white flowers, with the stems removed, and strung closely together upon a single fibre of tappa. </span>
      <span id="f2069">Corresponding ornaments were inserted in their ears, and woven garlands upon their heads. </span>
      <span id="f2070">About their waist they wore a short tunic of spotless white tappa, and some of them super-added to this a mantle of the same material, tied in an elaborate bow upon the left shoulder, and falling about the figure in picturesque folds.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2071">Thus arrayed, I would have matched the charming Fayaway against any beauty in the world.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2072">People may say what they will about the taste evinced by our fashionable ladies in dress. </span>
      <span id="f2073">Their jewels, their feathers, their silks, and their furbelows, would have sunk into utter insignificance beside the exquisite simplicity of attire adopted by the nymphs of the vale on this festive occasion. </span>
      <span id="f2074">I should like to have seen a gallery of coronation beauties, at Westminster Abbey, confronted for a moment by this band of island girls; their stiffness, formality, and affectation, contrasted with the artless vivacity and unconcealed natural graces of these savage maidens. </span>
      <span id="f2075">It would be the Venus de’ Medici placed beside a milliner’s doll. </span>
      <span id="f2076">It was not long before Kory-Kory and myself were left alone in the house, the rest of its inmates having departed for the Taboo Groves. </span>
      <span id="f2077">My valet was all impatience to follow them; and was as fidgety about my dilatory movements as a diner out waiting hat in hand at the bottom of the stairs for some lagging companion. </span>
      <span id="f2078">At last, yielding to his importunities, I set out for the Ti. </span>
      <span id="f2079">As we passed the houses peeping out from the groves through which our route lay, I noticed that they were entirely deserted by their inhabitants.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2080">When we reached the rock that abruptly terminated the path, and concealed from us the festive scene, wild shouts and a confused blending of voices assured me that the occasion, whatever it might be, had drawn together a great multitude. </span>
      <span id="f2081">Kory-Kory, previous to mounting the elevation, paused for a moment, like a dandy at a ball-room door, to put a hasty finish to his toilet. </span>
      <span id="f2082">During this short interval, the thought struck me that I ought myself perhaps to be taking some little pains with my appearance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2083">But as I had no holiday raiment, I was not a little puzzled to devise some means of decorating myself. </span>
      <span id="f2084">However, as I felt desirous to create a sensation, I determined to do all that lay in my power; and knowing that I could not delight the savages more than by conforming to their style of dress, I removed from my person the large robe of tappa which I was accustomed to wear over my shoulders whenever I sallied into the open air, and remained merely girt about with a short tunic descending from my waist to my knees.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2085">My quick-witted attendant fully appreciated the compliment I was paying to the costume of his race, and began more sedulously to arrange the folds of the one only garment which remained to me. </span>
      <span id="f2086">Whilst he was doing this, I caught sight of a knot of young lasses, who were sitting near us on the grass surrounded by heaps of flowers which they were forming into garlands. </span>
      <span id="f2087">I motioned to them to bring some of their handywork to me; and in an instant a dozen wreaths were at my disposal. </span>
      <span id="f2088">One of them I put round the apology for a hat which I had been forced to construct for myself out of palmetto-leaves, and some of the others I converted into a splendid girdle. </span>
      <span id="f2089">These operations finished, with the slow and dignified step of a full-dressed beau I ascended the rock.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>