<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
      <p>
      <span id="f02090">CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02091">THE FEAST OF CALABASHES</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02092">THE whole population of the valley seemed to be gathered within the precincts of the grove. </span>
      <span id="f02093">In the distance could be seen the long front of the Ti, its immense piazza swarming with men, arrayed in every variety of fantastic costume, and all vociferating with animated gestures; while the whole interval between it and the place where I stood was enlivened by groups of females fancifully decorated, dancing, capering, and uttering wild exclamations. </span>
      <span id="f02094">As soon as they descried me they set up a shout of welcome; and a band of them came dancing towards me, chanting as they approached some wild recitative. </span>
      <span id="f02095">The change in my garb seemed to transport them with delight, and clustering about me on all sides, they accompanied me towards the Ti. </span>
      <span id="f02096">When however we drew near it these joyous nymphs paused in their career, and parting on either side, permitted me to pass on to the now densely thronged building.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02097">So soon as I mounted to the pi-pi I saw at a glance that the revels were fairly under way.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02098">What lavish plenty reigned around?--Warwick feasting his retainers with beef and ale, was a niggard to the noble Mehevi!--All along the piazza of the Ti were arranged elaborately carved canoe-shaped vessels, some twenty feet in length, tied with newly made poee-poee, and sheltered from the sun by the broad leaves of the banana. </span>
      <span id="f02099">At intervals were heaps of green bread-fruit, raised in pyramidical stacks, resembling the regular piles of heavy shot to be seen in the yard of an arsenal. </span>
      <span id="f02100">Inserted into the interstices of the huge stones which formed the pi-pi were large boughs of trees; hanging from the branches of which, and screened from the sun by their foliage, were innumerable little packages with leafy coverings, containing the meat of the numerous hogs which had been slain, done up in this manner to make it more accessible to the crowd. </span>
      <span id="f02101">Leaning against the railing on the piazza were an immense number of long, heavy bamboos, plugged at the lower end, and with their projecting muzzles stuffed with a wad of leaves. </span>
      <span id="f02102">These were filled with water from the stream, and each of them might hold from four to five gallons.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02103">The banquet being thus spread, naught remained but for everyone to help himself at his pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f02104">Accordingly not a moment passed but the transplanted boughs I have mentioned were rifled by the throng of the fruit they certainly had never borne before. </span>
      <span id="f02105">Calabashes of poee-poee were continually being replenished from the extensive receptacle in which that article was stored, and multitudes of little fires were kindled about the Ti for the purpose of roasting the bread-fruit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02106">Within the building itself was presented a most extraordinary scene. </span>
      <span id="f02107">The immense lounge of mats lying between the parallel rows of the trunks of cocoanut trees, and extending the entire length of the house, at least two hundred feet, was covered by the reclining forms of a host of chiefs and warriors who were eating at a great rate, or soothing the cares of Polynesian life in the sedative fumes of tobacco. </span>
      <span id="f02108">The smoke was inhaled from large pipes, the bowls of which, made out of small cocoanut shells, were curiously carved in strange heathenish devices. </span>
      <span id="f02109">These were passed from mouth to mouth by the recumbent smokers, each of whom, taking two or three prodigious whiffs, handed the pipe to his neighbour; sometimes for that purpose stretching indolently across the body of some dozing individual whose exertions at the dinner-table had already induced sleep.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02110">The tobacco used among the Typees was of a very mild and pleasing flavour, and as I always saw it in leaves, and the natives appeared pretty well supplied with it, I was led to believe that it must have been the growth of the valley. </span>
      <span id="f02111">Indeed Kory-Kory gave me to understand that this was the case; but I never saw a single plant growing on the island. </span>
      <span id="f02112">At Nukuheva, and, I believe, in all the other valleys, the weed is very scarce, being only obtained in small quantities from foreigners, and smoking is consequently with the inhabitants of these places a very great luxury. </span>
      <span id="f02113">How it was that the Typees were so well furnished with it I cannot divine. </span>
      <span id="f02114">I should think them too indolent to devote any attention to its culture; and, indeed, as far as my observation extended, not a single atom of the soil was under any other cultivation than that of shower and sunshine. </span>
      <span id="f02115">The tobacco-plant, however, like the sugar-cane, may grow wild in some remote part of the vale.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02116">There were many in the Ti for whom the tobacco did not furnish a sufficient stimulus, and who accordingly had recourse to ‘arva’, as a more powerful agent in producing the desired effect.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02117">‘Arva’ is a root very generally dispersed over the South Seas, and from it is extracted a juice, the effects of which upon the system are at first stimulating in a moderate degree; but it soon relaxes the muscles, and exerting a narcotic influence produces a luxurious sleep. </span>
      <span id="f02118">In the valley this beverage was universally prepared in the following way:--Some half-dozen young boys seated themselves in a circle around an empty wooden vessel, each one of them being supplied with a certain quantity of the roots of the ‘arva’, broken into small bits and laid by his side. </span>
      <span id="f02119">A cocoanut goblet of water was passed around the juvenile company, who rinsing their mouths with its contents, proceeded to the business before them. </span>
      <span id="f02120">This merely consisted in thoroughly masticating the ‘arva’, and throwing it mouthful after mouthful into the receptacle provided. </span>
      <span id="f02121">When a sufficient quantity had been thus obtained water was poured upon the mass, and being stirred about with the forefinger of the right hand, the preparation was soon in readiness for use. </span>
      <span id="f02122">The ‘arva’ has medicinal qualities.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02123">Upon the Sandwich Islands it has been employed with no small success in the treatment of scrofulous affections, and in combating the ravages of a disease for whose frightful inroads the ill-starred inhabitants of that group are indebted to their foreign benefactors. </span>
      <span id="f02124">But the tenants of the Typee valley, as yet exempt from these inflictions, generally employ the ‘arva’ as a minister to social enjoyment, and a calabash of the liquid circulates among them as the bottle with us.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02125">Mehevi, who was greatly delighted with the change in my costume, gave me a cordial welcome. </span>
      <span id="f02126">He had reserved for me a most delectable mess of ‘cokoo’, well knowing my partiality for that dish; and had likewise selected three or four young cocoanuts, several roasted bread-fruit, and a magnificent bunch of bananas, for my especial comfort and gratification. </span>
      <span id="f02127">These various matters were at once placed before me; but Kory-Kory deemed the banquet entirely insufficient for my wants until he had supplied me with one of the leafy packages of pork, which, notwithstanding the somewhat hasty manner in which it had been prepared, possessed a most excellent flavour, and was surprisingly sweet and tender.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02128">Pork is not a staple article of food among the people of the Marquesas; consequently they pay little attention to the BREEDING of the swine. </span>
      <span id="f02129">The hogs are permitted to roam at large on the groves, where they obtain no small part of their nourishment from the cocoanuts which continually fall from the trees. </span>
      <span id="f02130">But it is only after infinite labour and difficulty, that the hungry animal can pierce the husk and shell so as to get at the meat. </span>
      <span id="f02131">I have frequently been amused at seeing one of them, after crunching the obstinate nut with his teeth for a long time unsuccessfully, get into a violent passion with it. </span>
      <span id="f02132">He would then root furiously under the cocoanut, and, with a fling of his snout, toss it before him on the ground. </span>
      <span id="f02133">Following it up, he would crunch at it again savagely for a moment, and then next knock it on one side, pausing immediately after, as if wondering how it could so suddenly have disappeared. </span>
      <span id="f02134">In this way the persecuted cocoanuts were often chased half across the valley.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02135">The second day of the Feast of Calabashes was ushered in by still more uproarious noises than the first. </span>
      <span id="f02136">The skins of innumerable sheep seemed to be resounding to the blows of an army of drummers. </span>
      <span id="f02137">Startled from my slumbers by the din, I leaped up, and found the whole household engaged in making preparations for immediate departure. </span>
      <span id="f02138">Curious to discover of what strange events these novel sounds might be the precursors, and not a little desirous to catch a sight of the instruments which produced the terrific noise, I accompanied the natives as soon as they were in readiness to depart for the Taboo Groves.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02139">The comparatively open space that extended from the Ti toward the rock, to which I have before alluded as forming the ascent to the place, was, with the building itself, now altogether deserted by the men; the whole distance being filled by bands of females, shouting and dancing under the influence of some strange excitement.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02140">I was amused at the appearance of four or five old women who, in a state of utter nudity, with their arms extended flatly down their sides, and holding themselves perfectly erect, were leaping stiffly into the air, like so many sticks bobbing to the surface, after being pressed perpendicularly into the water. </span>
      <span id="f02141">They preserved the utmost gravity of countenance, and continued their extraordinary movements without a single moment’s cessation. </span>
      <span id="f02142">They did not appear to attract the observation of the crowd around them, but I must candidly confess that for my own part, I stared at them most pertinaciously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02143">Desirous of being enlightened in regard to the meaning of this peculiar diversion, I turned, inquiringly to Kory-Kory; that learned Typee immediately proceeded to explain the whole matter thoroughly. </span>
      <span id="f02144">But all that I could comprehend from what he said was, that the leaping figures before me were bereaved widows, whose partners had been slain in battle many moons previously; and who, at every festival, gave public evidence in this manner of their calamities. </span>
      <span id="f02145">It was evident that Kory-Kory considered this an all-sufficient reason for so indecorous a custom; but I must say that it did not satisfy me as to its propriety.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02146">Leaving these afflicted females, we passed on to the Hoolah Hoolah ground. </span>
      <span id="f02147">Within the spacious quadrangle, the whole population of the valley seemed to be assembled, and the sight presented was truly remarkable. </span>
      <span id="f02148">Beneath the sheds of bamboo which opened towards the interior of the square reclined the principal chiefs and warriors, while a miscellaneous throng lay at their ease under the enormous trees which spread a majestic canopy overhead. </span>
      <span id="f02149">Upon the terraces of the gigantic altars, at each end, were deposited green bread-fruit in baskets of cocoanut leaves, large rolls of tappa, bunches of ripe bananas, clusters of mammee-apples, the golden-hued fruit of the artu-tree, and baked hogs, laid out in large wooden trenchers, fancifully decorated with freshly plucked leaves, whilst a variety of rude implements of war were piled in confused heaps before the ranks of hideous idols. </span>
      <span id="f02150">Fruits of various kinds were likewise suspended in leafen baskets, from the tops of poles planted uprightly, and at regular intervals, along the lower terraces of both altars. </span>
      <span id="f02151">At their base were arranged two parallel rows of cumbersome drums, standing at least fifteen feet in height, and formed from the hollow trunks of large trees. </span>
      <span id="f02152">Their heads were covered with shark skins, and their barrels were elaborately carved with various quaint figures and devices. </span>
      <span id="f02153">At regular intervals they were bound round by a species of sinnate of various colours, and strips of native cloth flattened upon them here and there. </span>
      <span id="f02154">Behind these instruments were built slight platforms, upon which stood a number of young men who, beating violently with the palms of their hands upon the drum-heads, produced those outrageous sounds which had awakened me in the morning. </span>
      <span id="f02155">Every few minutes these musical performers hopped down from their elevation into the crowd below, and their places were immediately supplied by fresh recruits. </span>
      <span id="f02156">Thus an incessant din was kept up that might have startled Pandemonium.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02157">Precisely in the middle of the quadrangle were placed perpendicularly in the ground, a hundred or more slender, fresh-cut poles, stripped of their bark, and decorated at the end with a floating pennon of white tappa; the whole being fenced about with a little picket of canes. </span>
      <span id="f02158">For what purpose these angular ornaments were intended I in vain endeavoured to discover.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02159">Another most striking feature of the performance was exhibited by a score of old men, who sat cross-legged in the little pulpits, which encircled the trunks of the immense trees growing in the middle of the enclosure. </span>
      <span id="f02160">These venerable gentlemen, who I presume were the priests, kept up an uninterrupted monotonous chant, which was partly drowned in the roar of drums. </span>
      <span id="f02161">In the right hand they held a finely woven grass fan, with a heavy black wooden handle curiously chased: these fans they kept in continual motion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02162">But no attention whatever seemed to be paid to the drummers or to the old priests; the individuals who composed the vast crowd present being entirely taken up in chanting and laughing with one another, smoking, drinking ‘arva’, and eating. </span>
      <span id="f02163">For all the observation it attracted, or the good it achieved, the whole savage orchestra might with great advantage to its own members and the company in general, have ceased the prodigious uproar they were making.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02164">In vain I questioned Kory-Kory and others of the natives, as to the meaning of the strange things that were going on; all their explanations were conveyed in such a mass of outlandish gibberish and gesticulation that I gave up the attempt in despair. </span>
      <span id="f02165">All that day the drums resounded, the priests chanted, and the multitude feasted and roared till sunset, when the throng dispersed, and the Taboo Groves were again abandoned to quiet and repose. </span>
      <span id="f02166">The next day the same scene was repeated until night, when this singular festival terminated.</span>
      </p>
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>