<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
      <p>
      <span id="f02316">CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02317">GENERAL INFORMATION GATHERED AT THE FESTIVAL--PERSONAL BEAUTY OF THE TYPEES--THEIR SUPERIORITY OVER THE INHABITANTS OF THE OTHER ISLANDS--DIVERSITY OF COMPLEXION--A VEGETABLE COSMETIC AND OINTMENT--TESTIMONY OF VOYAGERS TO THE UNCOMMON BEAUTY OF THE MARQUESANS--FEW EVIDENCES OF INTERCOURSE WITH CIVILIZED BEINGS--DILAPIDATED MUSKET--PRIMITIVE SIMPLICITY OF GOVERNMENT--REGAL DIGNITY OF MEHEVI</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02318">ALTHOUGH I had been unable during the late festival to obtain information on many interesting subjects which had much excited my curiosity, still that important event had not passed by without adding materially to my general knowledge of the islanders.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02319">I was especially struck by the physical strength and beauty which they displayed, by their great superiority in these respects over the inhabitants of the neighbouring bay of Nukuheva, and by the singular contrasts they presented among themselves in their various shades of complexion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02320">In beauty of form they surpassed anything I had ever seen. </span>
      <span id="f02321">Not a single instance of natural deformity was observable in all the throng attending the revels. </span>
      <span id="f02322">Occasionally I noticed among the men the scars of wounds they had received in battle; and sometimes, though very seldom, the loss of a finger, an eye, or an arm, attributable to the same cause. </span>
      <span id="f02323">With these exceptions, every individual appeared free from those blemishes which sometimes mar the effect of an otherwise perfect form. </span>
      <span id="f02324">But their physical excellence did not merely consist in an exemption from these evils; nearly every individual of their number might have been taken for a sculptor’s model.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02325">When I remembered that these islanders derived no advantage from dress, but appeared in all the naked simplicity of nature, I could not avoid comparing them with the fine gentlemen and dandies who promenade such unexceptionable figures in our frequented thoroughfares. </span>
      <span id="f02326">Stripped of the cunning artifices of the tailor, and standing forth in the garb of Eden--what a sorry, set of round-shouldered, spindle-shanked, crane-necked varlets would civilized men appear! </span>
      <span id="f02327">Stuffed calves, padded breasts, and scientifically cut pantaloons would then avail them nothing, and the effect would be truly deplorable.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02328">Nothing in the appearance of the islanders struck me more forcibly than the whiteness of their teeth. </span>
      <span id="f02329">The novelist always compares the masticators of his heroine to ivory; but I boldly pronounce the teeth of the Typee to be far more beautiful than ivory itself. </span>
      <span id="f02330">The jaws of the oldest graybeards among them were much better garnished than those of most of the youths of civilized countries; while the teeth of the young and middle-aged, in their purity and whiteness, were actually dazzling to the eye. </span>
      <span id="f02331">Their marvellous whiteness of the teeth is to be ascribed to the pure vegetable diet of these people, and the uninterrupted healthfulness of their natural mode of life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02332">The men, in almost every instance, are of lofty stature, scarcely ever less than six feet in height, while the other sex are uncommonly diminutive. </span>
      <span id="f02333">The early period of life at which the human form arrives at maturity in this generous tropical climate, likewise deserves to be mentioned. </span>
      <span id="f02334">A little creature, not more than thirteen years of age, and who in other particulars might be regarded as a mere child, is often seen nursing her own baby, whilst lads who, under less ripening skies, would be still at school, are here responsible fathers of families.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02335">On first entering the Typee Valley, I had been struck with the marked contrast presented by its inhabitants with those of the bay I had previously left. </span>
      <span id="f02336">In the latter place, I had not been favourably impressed with the personal appearance of the male portion of the population; although with the females, excepting in some truly melancholy instances, I had been wonderfully pleased. </span>
      <span id="f02337">I had observed that even the little intercourse Europeans had carried on with the Nukuheva natives had not failed to leave its traces amongst them. </span>
      <span id="f02338">One of the most dreadful curses under which humanity labours had commenced its havocks, and betrayed, as it ever does among the South Sea islanders, the most aggravated symptoms. </span>
      <span id="f02339">From this, as from all other foreign inflictions, the yet uncontaminated tenants of the Typee Valley were wholly exempt; and long may they continue so. </span>
      <span id="f02340">Better will it be for them for ever to remain the happy and innocent heathens and barbarians that they now are, than, like the wretched inhabitants of the Sandwich Islands, to enjoy the mere name of Christians without experiencing any of the vital operations of true religion, whilst, at the same time, they are made the victims of the worst vices and evils of civilized life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02341">Apart, however, from these considerations, I am inclined to believe that there exists a radical difference between the two tribes, if indeed they are not distinct races of men. </span>
      <span id="f02342">To those who have merely touched at Nukuheva Bay, without visiting other portions of the island, it would hardly appear credible the diversities presented between the various small clans inhabiting so diminutive a spot. </span>
      <span id="f02343">But the hereditary hostility which has existed between them for ages, fully accounts for this.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02344">Not so easy, however, is it to assign an adequate cause for the endless variety of complexions to be seen in the Typee Valley. </span>
      <span id="f02345">During the festival, I had noticed several young females whose skins were almost as white as any Saxon damsel’s; a slight dash of the mantling brown being all that marked the difference. </span>
      <span id="f02346">This comparative fairness of complexion, though in a great degree perfectly natural, is partly the result of an artificial process, and of an entire exclusion from the sun. </span>
      <span id="f02347">The juice of the ‘papa’ root found in great abundance at the head of the valley, is held in great esteem as a cosmetic, with which many of the females daily anoint their whole person. </span>
      <span id="f02348">The habitual use of it whitens and beautifies the skin. </span>
      <span id="f02349">Those of the young girls who resort to this method of heightening their charms, never expose themselves selves to the rays of the sun; an observance, however, that produces little or no inconvenience, since there are but few of the inhabited portions of the vale which are not shaded over with a spreading canopy of boughs, so that one may journey from house to house, scarcely deviating from the direct course, and yet never once see his shadow cast upon the ground.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02350">The ‘papa’, when used, is suffered to remain upon the skin for several hours; being of a light green colour, it consequently imparts for the time a similar hue to the complexion. </span>
      <span id="f02351">Nothing, therefore, can be imagined more singular than the appearance of these nearly naked damsels immediately after the application of the cosmetic. </span>
      <span id="f02352">To look at one of them you would almost suppose she was some vegetable in an unripe state; and that, instead of living in the shade for ever, she ought to be placed out in the sun to ripen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02353">All the islanders are more or less in the habit of anointing themselves; the women preferring the ‘aker’ to ‘papa’, and the men using the oil of the cocoanut. </span>
      <span id="f02354">Mehevi was remarkable fond of mollifying his entire cuticle with this ointment. </span>
      <span id="f02355">Sometimes he might be seen, with his whole body fairly reeking with the perfumed oil of the nut, looking as if he had just emerged from a soap-boiler’s vat, or had undergone the process of dipping in a tallow-chandlery. </span>
      <span id="f02356">To this cause perhaps, united to their frequent bathing and extreme cleanliness, is ascribable, in a great measure, the marvellous purity and smoothness of skin exhibited by the natives in general.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02357">The prevailing tint among the women of the valley was a light olive, and of this style of complexion Fayaway afforded the most beautiful example. </span>
      <span id="f02358">Others were still darker; while not a few were of a genuine golden colour, and some of a swarthy hue.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02359">As agreeing with much previously mentioned in this narrative I may here observe that Mendanna, their discoverer, in his account of the Marquesas, described the natives as wondrously beautiful to behold, and as nearly resembling the people of southern Europe. </span>
      <span id="f02360">The first of these islands seen by Mendanna was La Madelena, which is not far distant from Nukuheva; and its inhabitants in every respect resemble those dwelling on that and the other islands of the group. </span>
      <span id="f02361">Figueroa, the chronicler of Mendanna’s voyage, says, that on the morning the land was descried, when the Spaniards drew near the shore, there sallied forth, in rude progression, about seventy canoes, and at the same time many of the inhabitants (females I presume) made towards the ships by swimming. </span>
      <span id="f02362">He adds, that ‘in complexion they were nearly white; of good stature, and finely formed; and on their faces and bodies were delineated representations of fishes and other devices’. </span>
      <span id="f02363">The old Don then goes on to say, ‘There came, among others, two lads paddling their canoe, whose eyes were fixed on the ship; they had beautiful faces and the most promising animation of countenance; and were in all things so becoming, that the pilot-mayor Quiros affirmed, nothing in his life ever caused him so much regret as the leaving such fine creatures to be lost in that country.’* More than two hundred years have gone by since the passage of which the above is a translation was written; and it appears to me now, as I read it, as fresh and true as if written but yesterday. </span>
      <span id="f02364">The islanders are still the same; and I have seen boys in the Typee Valley of whose ‘beautiful faces’ and promising ‘animation of countenance’ no one who has not beheld them can form any adequate idea. </span>
      <span id="f02365">Cook, in the account of his voyage, pronounces the Marquesans as by far the most splendid islanders in the South Seas. </span>
      <span id="f02366">Stewart, the chaplain of the U.S. </span>
      <span id="f02367">ship Vincennes, in his ‘Scenes in the South Seas’, expresses, in more than one place, his amazement at the surpassing loveliness of the women; and says that many of the Nukuheva damsels reminded him forcibly of the most celebrated beauties in his own land. </span>
      <span id="f02368">Fanning, a Yankee mariner of some reputation, likewise records his lively impressions of the physical appearance of these people; and Commodore David Porter of the U.S. </span>
      <span id="f02369">frigate Essex, is said to have been vastly smitten by the beauty of the ladies. </span>
      <span id="f02370">Their great superiority over all other Polynesians cannot fail to attract the notice of those who visit the principal groups in the Pacific. </span>
      <span id="f02371">The voluptuous Tahitians are the only people who at all deserve to be compared with them; while the dark-haired Hawaiians and the woolly-headed Feejees are immeasurably inferior to them. </span>
      <span id="f02372">The distinguishing characteristic of the Marquesan islanders, and that which at once strikes you, is the European cast of their features--a peculiarity seldom observable among other uncivilized people. </span>
      <span id="f02373">Many of their faces present profiles classically beautiful, and in the valley of Typee I saw several who, like the stranger Marnoo, were in every respect models of beauty.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02374">* This passage, which is cited as an almost literal translation from the original, I found in a small volume entitled ‘Circumnavigation of the Globe, in which volume are several extracts from ‘Dalrymple’s Historical Collections’. </span>
      <span id="f02375">The last-mentioned work I have never seen, but it is said to contain a very correct English version of great part of the learned Doctor Christoval Suaverde da Figueroa’s History of Mendanna’s Voyage, published at Madrid, A.D. </span>
      <span id="f02376">1613.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02377">Some of the natives present at the Feast of Calabashes had displayed a few articles of European dress; disposed however, about their persons after their own peculiar fashion. </span>
      <span id="f02378">Among these I perceived two pieces of cotton-cloth which poor Toby and myself had bestowed upon our youthful guides the afternoon we entered the valley. </span>
      <span id="f02379">They were evidently reserved for gala days; and during those of the festival they rendered the young islanders who wore them very distinguished characters. </span>
      <span id="f02380">The small number who were similarly adorned, and the great value they appeared to place upon the most common and most trivial articles, furnished ample evidence of the very restricted intercourse they held with vessels touching at the island. </span>
      <span id="f02381">A few cotton handkerchiefs, of a gay pattern, tied about the neck, and suffered to fall over the shoulder; strips of fanciful calico, swathed about the loins, were nearly all I saw.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02382">Indeed, throughout the valley, there were few things of any kind to be seen of European origin. </span>
      <span id="f02383">All I ever saw, besides the articles just alluded to, were the six muskets preserved in the Ti, and three or four similar implements of warfare hung up in other houses; some small canvas bags, partly filled with bullets and powder, and half a dozen old hatchet-heads, with the edges blunted and battered to such a degree as to render them utterly useless. </span>
      <span id="f02384">These last seemed to be regarded as nearly worthless by the natives; and several times they held up, one of them before me, and throwing it aside with a gesture of disgust, manifested their contempt for anything that could so soon become unserviceable.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02385">But the muskets, the powder, and the bullets were held in most extravagant esteem. </span>
      <span id="f02386">The former, from their great age and the peculiarities they exhibited, were well worthy a place in any antiquarian’s armoury. </span>
      <span id="f02387">I remember in particular one that hung in the Ti, and which Mehevi--supposing as a matter of course that I was able to repair it--had put into my hands for that purpose. </span>
      <span id="f02388">It was one of those clumsy, old-fashioned, English pieces known generally as Tower Hill muskets, and, for aught I know, might have been left on the island by Wallace, Carteret, Cook, or Vancouver. </span>
      <span id="f02389">The stock was half rotten and worm-eaten; the lock was as rusty and about as well adapted to its ostensible purpose as an old door-hinge; the threading of the screws about the trigger was completely worn away; while the barrel shook in the wood. </span>
      <span id="f02390">Such was the weapon the chief desired me to restore to its original condition. </span>
      <span id="f02391">As I did not possess the accomplishments of a gunsmith, and was likewise destitute of the necessary tools, I was reluctantly obliged to signify my inability to perform the task. </span>
      <span id="f02392">At this unexpected communication Mehevi regarded me, for a moment, as if he half suspected I was some inferior sort of white man, who after all did not know much more than a Typee. </span>
      <span id="f02393">However, after a most laboured explanation of the matter, I succeeded in making him understand the extreme difficulty of the task. </span>
      <span id="f02394">Scarcely satisfied with my apologies, however, he marched off with the superannuated musket in something of a huff, as if he would no longer expose it to the indignity of being manipulated by such unskilful fingers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02395">During the festival I had not failed to remark the simplicity of manner, the freedom from all restraint, and, to certain degree, the equality of condition manifested by the natives in general. </span>
      <span id="f02396">No one appeared to assume any arrogant pretensions. </span>
      <span id="f02397">There was little more than a slight difference in costume to distinguish the chiefs from the other natives. </span>
      <span id="f02398">All appeared to mix together freely, and without any reserve; although I noticed that the wishes of a chief, even when delivered in the mildest tone, received the same immediate obedience which elsewhere would have been only accorded to a peremptory command. </span>
      <span id="f02399">What may be the extent of the authority of the chiefs over the rest of the tribe, I will not venture to assert; but from all I saw during my stay in the valley, I was induced to believe that in matters concerning the general welfare it was very limited. </span>
      <span id="f02400">The required degree of deference towards them, however, was willingly and cheerfully yielded; and as all authority is transmitted from father to son, I have no doubt that one of the effects here, as elsewhere, of high birth, is to induce respect and obedience.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02401">The civil institutions of the Marquesas Islands appear to be in this, as in other respects, directly the reverse of those of the Tahitian and Hawaiian groups, where the original power of the king and chiefs was far more despotic than that of any tyrant in civilized countries. </span>
      <span id="f02402">At Tahiti it used to be death for one of the inferior orders to approach, without permission, under the shadow, of the king’s house; or to fail in paying the customary reverence when food destined for the king was borne past them by his messengers. </span>
      <span id="f02403">At the Sandwich Islands, Kaahumanu, the gigantic old dowager queen--a woman of nearly four hundred pounds weight, and who is said to be still living at Mowee--was accustomed, in some of her terrific gusts of temper, to snatch up an ordinary sized man who had offended her, and snap his spine across her knee. </span>
      <span id="f02404">Incredible as this may seem, it is a fact. </span>
      <span id="f02405">While at Lahainaluna--the residence of this monstrous Jezebel--a humpbacked wretch was pointed out to me, who, some twenty-five years previously, had had the vertebrae of his backbone very seriously discomposed by his gentle mistress.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02406">The particular grades of rank existing among the chiefs of Typee, I could not in all cases determine. </span>
      <span id="f02407">Previous to the Feast of Calabashes I had been puzzled what particular station to assign to Mehevi. </span>
      <span id="f02408">But the important part he took upon that occasion convinced me that he had no superior among the inhabitants of the valley. </span>
      <span id="f02409">I had invariably noticed a certain degree of deference paid to him by all with whom I had ever seen him brought in contact; but when I remembered that my wanderings had been confined to a limited portion of the valley, and that towards the sea a number of distinguished chiefs resided, some of whom had separately visited me at Marheyo’s house, and whom, until the Festival, I had never seen in the company of Mehevi, I felt disposed to believe that his rank after all might not be particularly elevated.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02410">The revels, however, had brought together all the warriors whom I had seen individually and in groups at different times and places. </span>
      <span id="f02411">Among them Mehevi moved with an easy air of superiority which was not to be mistaken; and he whom I had only looked at as the hospitable host of the Ti, and one of the military leaders of the tribe, now assumed in my eyes the dignity of royal station. </span>
      <span id="f02412">His striking costume, no less than his naturally commanding figure, seemed indeed to give him pre-eminence over the rest. </span>
      <span id="f02413">The towering helmet of feathers that he wore raised him in height above all who surrounded him; and though some others were similarly adorned, the length and luxuriance of their plumes were inferior to his.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02414">Mehevi was in fact the greatest of the chiefs--the head of his clan--the sovereign of the valley; and the simplicity of the social institutions of the people could not have been more completely proved than by the fact, that after having been several weeks in the valley, and almost in daily intercourse with Mehevi, I should have remained until the time of the festival ignorant of his regal character. </span>
      <span id="f02415">But a new light had now broken in upon me. </span>
      <span id="f02416">The Ti was the palace--and Mehevi the king. </span>
      <span id="f02417">Both the one and the other of a most simple and patriarchal nature: it must be allowed, and wholly unattended by the ceremonious pomp which usually surrounds the purple.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02418">After having made this discovery I could not avoid congratulating myself that Mehevi had from the first taken me as it were under his royal protection, and that he still continued to entertain for me the warmest regard, as far at least as I was enabled to judge from appearances. </span>
      <span id="f02419">For the future I determined to pay most assiduous court to him, hoping that eventually through his kindness I might obtain my liberty.</span>
      </p>
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>