<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
      <p>
      <span id="f02576">CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02577">THE SOCIAL CONDITION AND GENERAL CHARACTER OF THE TYPEES</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02578">I HAVE already mentioned that the influence exerted over the people of the valley by their chiefs was mild in the extreme; and as to any general rule or standard of conduct by which the commonality were governed in their intercourse with each other, so far as my observation extended, I should be almost tempted to say, that none existed on the island, except, indeed, the mysterious ‘Taboo’ be considered as such. </span>
      <span id="f02579">During the time I lived among the Typees, no one was ever put upon his trial for any offence against the public. </span>
      <span id="f02580">To all appearance there were no courts of law or equity. </span>
      <span id="f02581">There was no municipal police for the purpose of apprehending vagrants and disorderly characters. </span>
      <span id="f02582">In short, there were no legal provisions whatever for the well-being and conservation of society, the enlightened end of civilized legislation. </span>
      <span id="f02583">And yet everything went on in the valley with a harmony and smoothness unparalleled, I will venture to assert, in the most select, refined, and pious associations of mortals in Christendom. </span>
      <span id="f02584">How are we to explain this enigma? </span>
      <span id="f02585">These islanders were heathens! </span>
      <span id="f02586">savages! </span>
      <span id="f02587">ay, cannibals! </span>
      <span id="f02588">and how came they without the aid of established law, to exhibit, in so eminent a degree, that social order which is the greatest blessing and highest pride of the social state?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02589">It may reasonably be inquired, how were these people governed? </span>
      <span id="f02590">how were their passions controlled in their everyday transactions? </span>
      <span id="f02591">It must have been by an inherent principle of honesty and charity towards each other. </span>
      <span id="f02592">They seemed to be governed by that sort of tacit common-sense law which, say what they will of the inborn lawlessness of the human race, has its precepts graven on every breast. </span>
      <span id="f02593">The grand principles of virtue and honour, however they may be distorted by arbitrary codes, are the same all the world over: and where these principles are concerned, the right or wrong of any action appears the same to the uncultivated as to the enlightened mind. </span>
      <span id="f02594">It is to this indwelling, this universally diffused perception of what is just and noble, that the integrity of the Marquesans in their intercourse with each other, is to be attributed. </span>
      <span id="f02595">In the darkest nights they slept securely, with all their worldly wealth around them, in houses the doors of which were never fastened. </span>
      <span id="f02596">The disquieting ideas of theft or assassination never disturbed them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02597">Each islander reposed beneath his own palmetto thatching, or sat under his own bread-fruit trees, with none to molest or alarm him. </span>
      <span id="f02598">There was not a padlock in the valley, nor anything that answered the purpose of one: still there was no community of goods. </span>
      <span id="f02599">This long spear, so elegantly carved, and highly polished, belongs to Wormoonoo: it is far handsomer than the one which old Marheyo so greatly prizes; it is the most valuable article belonging to its owner. </span>
      <span id="f02600">And yet I have seen it leaning against a cocoanut tree in the grove, and there it was found when sought for. </span>
      <span id="f02601">Here is a sperm-whale tooth, graven all over with cunning devices: it is the property of Karluna; it is the most precious of the damsel’s ornaments. </span>
      <span id="f02602">In her estimation its price is far above rubies--and yet there hangs the dental jewel by its cord of braided bark, in the girl’s house, which is far back in the valley; the door is left open, and all the inmates have gone off to bathe in the stream.*</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02603">*The strict honesty which the inhabitants of nearly all the Polynesian Islands manifest toward each other, is in striking contrast with the thieving propensities some of them evince in their intercourse with foreigners. </span>
      <span id="f02604">It would almost seem that, according to their peculiar code of morals, the pilfering of a hatchet or a wrought nail from a European, is looked upon as a praiseworthy action. </span>
      <span id="f02605">Or rather, it may be presumed, that bearing in mind the wholesale forays made upon them by their nautical visitors, they consider the property of the latter as a fair object of reprisal. </span>
      <span id="f02606">This consideration, while it serves to reconcile an apparent contradiction in the moral character of the islanders, should in some measure alter that low opinion of it which the reader of South Sea voyages is too apt to form.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02607">So much for the respect in which ‘personal property’ is held in Typee; how secure an investment of ‘real property’ may be, I cannot take upon me to say. </span>
      <span id="f02608">Whether the land of the valley was the joint property of its inhabitants, or whether it was parcelled out among a certain number of landed proprietors who allowed everybody to ‘squat’ and ‘poach’ as much as he or she pleased, I never could ascertain. </span>
      <span id="f02609">At any rate, musty parchments and title-deeds there were none on the island; and I am half inclined to believe that its inhabitants hold their broad valleys in fee simple from Nature herself; to have and to hold, so long as grass grows and water runs; or until their French visitors, by a summary mode of conveyancing, shall appropriate them to their own benefit and behoof.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02610">Yesterday I saw Kory-Kory hie him away, armed with a long pole, with which, standing on the ground, he knocked down the fruit from the topmost boughs of the trees, and brought them home in his basket of cocoanut leaves. </span>
      <span id="f02611">Today I see an islander, whom I know to reside in a distant part of the valley, doing the self-same thing. </span>
      <span id="f02612">On the sloping bank of the stream are a number of banana-trees I have often seen a score or two of young people making a merry foray on the great golden clusters, and bearing them off, one after another, to different parts of the vale, shouting and trampling as they went. </span>
      <span id="f02613">No churlish old curmudgeon could have been the owner of that grove of bread-fruit trees, or of these gloriously yellow bunches of bananas.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02614">From what I have said it will be perceived that there is a vast difference between ‘personal property’ and ‘real estate’ in the valley of Typee. </span>
      <span id="f02615">Some individuals, of course, are more wealthy than others. </span>
      <span id="f02616">For example, the ridge-pole of Marheyo’s house bends under the weight of many a huge packet of tappa; his long couch is laid with mats placed one upon the other seven deep. </span>
      <span id="f02617">Outside, Tinor has ranged along in her bamboo cupboard--or whatever the place may be called--a goodly array of calabashes and wooden trenchers. </span>
      <span id="f02618">Now, the house just beyond the grove, and next to Marheyo’s, occupied by Ruaruga, is not quite so well furnished. </span>
      <span id="f02619">There are only three moderate-sized packages swinging overhead: there are only two layers of mats beneath; and the calabashes and trenchers are not so numerous, nor so tastefully stained and carved. </span>
      <span id="f02620">But then, Ruaruga has a house--not so pretty a one, to be sure--but just as commodious as Marheyo’s; and, I suppose, if he wished to vie with his neighbour’s establishment, he could do so with very little trouble. </span>
      <span id="f02621">These, in short, constituted the chief differences perceivable in the relative wealth of the people in Typee.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02622">Civilization does not engross all the virtues of humanity: she has not even her full share of them. </span>
      <span id="f02623">They flourish in greater abundance and attain greater strength among many barbarous people. </span>
      <span id="f02624">The hospitality of the wild Arab, the courage of the North American Indian, and the faithful friendship of some of the Polynesian nations, far surpass anything of a similar kind among the polished communities of Europe. </span>
      <span id="f02625">If truth and justice, and the better principles of our nature, cannot exist unless enforced by the statute-book, how are we to account for the social condition of the Typees? </span>
      <span id="f02626">So pure and upright were they in all the relations of life, that entering their valley, as I did, under the most erroneous impressions of their character, I was soon led to exclaim in amazement: ‘Are these the ferocious savages, the blood-thirsty cannibals of whom I have heard such frightful tales! </span>
      <span id="f02627">They deal more kindly with each other, and are more humane than many who study essays on virtue and benevolence, and who repeat every night that beautiful prayer breathed first by the lips of the divine and gentle Jesus.’ I will frankly declare that after passing a few weeks in this valley of the Marquesas, I formed a higher estimate of human nature than I had ever before entertained. </span>
      <span id="f02628">But alas! </span>
      <span id="f02629">since then I have been one of the crew of a man-of-war, and the pent-up wickedness of five hundred men has nearly overturned all my previous theories.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02630">There was one admirable trait in the general character of the Typees which, more than anything else, secured my admiration: it was the unanimity of feeling they displayed on every occasion. </span>
      <span id="f02631">With them there hardly appeared to be any difference of opinion upon any subject whatever. </span>
      <span id="f02632">They all thought and acted alike. </span>
      <span id="f02633">I do not conceive that they could support a debating society for a single night: there would be nothing to dispute about; and were they to call a convention to take into consideration the state of the tribe, its session would be a remarkably short one. </span>
      <span id="f02634">They showed this spirit of unanimity in every action of life; everything was done in concert and good fellowship. </span>
      <span id="f02635">I will give an instance of this fraternal feeling.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02636">One day, in returning with Kory-Kory from my accustomed visit to the Ti, we passed by a little opening in the grove; on one side of which, my attendant informed me, was that afternoon to be built a dwelling of bamboo. </span>
      <span id="f02637">At least a hundred of the natives were bringing materials to the ground, some carrying in their hands one or two of the canes which were to form the sides, others slender rods of the habiscus, strung with palmetto leaves, for the roof. </span>
      <span id="f02638">Every one contributed something to the work; and by the united, but easy, and even indolent, labours of all, the entire work was completed before sunset. </span>
      <span id="f02639">The islanders, while employed in erecting this tenement, reminded me of a colony of beavers at work. </span>
      <span id="f02640">To be sure, they were hardly as silent and demure as those wonderful creatures, nor were they by any means as diligent. </span>
      <span id="f02641">To tell the truth they were somewhat inclined to be lazy, but a perfect tumult of hilarity prevailed; and they worked together so unitedly, and seemed actuated by such an instinct of friendliness, that it was truly beautiful to behold.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02642">Not a single female took part in this employment: and if the degree of consideration in which the ever-adorable sex is held by the men be--as the philosophers affirm--a just criterion of the degree of refinement among a people, then I may truly pronounce the Typees to be as polished a community as ever the sun shone upon. </span>
      <span id="f02643">The religious restrictions of the taboo alone excepted, the women of the valley were allowed every possible indulgence. </span>
      <span id="f02644">Nowhere are the ladies more assiduously courted; nowhere are they better appreciated as the contributors to our highest enjoyments; and nowhere are they more sensible of their power. </span>
      <span id="f02645">Far different from their condition among many rude nations, where the women are made to perform all the work while their ungallant lords and masters lie buried in sloth, the gentle sex in the valley of Typee were exempt from toil, if toil it might be called that, even in the tropical climate, never distilled one drop of perspiration. </span>
      <span id="f02646">Their light household occupations, together with the manufacture of tappa, the platting of mats, and the polishing of drinking-vessels, were the only employments pertaining to the women. </span>
      <span id="f02647">And even these resembled those pleasant avocations which fill up the elegant morning leisure of our fashionable ladies at home. </span>
      <span id="f02648">But in these occupations, slight and agreeable though they were, the giddy young girls very seldom engaged. </span>
      <span id="f02649">Indeed these wilful care-killing damsels were averse to all useful employment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02650">Like so many spoiled beauties, they ranged through the groves--bathed in the stream--danced--flirted--played all manner of mischievous pranks, and passed their days in one merry round of thoughtless happiness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02651">During my whole stay on the island I never witnessed a single quarrel, nor anything that in the slightest degree approached even to a dispute. </span>
      <span id="f02652">The natives appeared to form one household, whose members were bound together by the ties of strong affection. </span>
      <span id="f02653">The love of kindred I did not so much perceive, for it seemed blended in the general love; and where all were treated as brothers and sisters, it was hard to tell who were actually related to each other by blood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02654">Let it not be supposed that I have overdrawn this picture. </span>
      <span id="f02655">I have not done so. </span>
      <span id="f02656">Nor let it be urged, that the hostility of this tribe to foreigners, and the hereditary feuds they carry on against their fellow-islanders beyond the mountains, are facts which contradict me. </span>
      <span id="f02657">Not so; these apparent discrepancies are easily reconciled. </span>
      <span id="f02658">By many a legendary tale of violence and wrong, as well as by events which have passed before their eyes, these people have been taught to look upon white men with abhorrence. </span>
      <span id="f02659">The cruel invasion of their country by Porter has alone furnished them with ample provocation; and I can sympathize in the spirit which prompts the Typee warrior to guard all the passes to his valley with the point of his levelled spear, and, standing upon the beach, with his back turned upon his green home, to hold at bay the intruding European.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02660">As to the origin of the enmity of this particular clan towards the neighbouring tribes, I cannot so confidently speak. </span>
      <span id="f02661">I will not say that their foes are the aggressors, nor will I endeavour to palliate their conduct. </span>
      <span id="f02662">But surely, if our evil passions must find vent, it is far better to expend them on strangers and aliens, than in the bosom of the community in which we dwell. </span>
      <span id="f02663">In many polished countries civil contentions, as well as domestic enmities, are prevalent, and the same time that the most atrocious foreign wars are waged. </span>
      <span id="f02664">How much less guilty, then, are our islanders, who of these three sins are only chargeable with one, and that the least criminal!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02665">The reader will ere long have reason to suspect that the Typees are not free from the guilt of cannibalism; and he will then, perhaps, charge me with admiring a people against whom so odious a crime is chargeable. </span>
      <span id="f02666">But this only enormity in their character is not half so horrible as it is usually described. </span>
      <span id="f02667">According to the popular fictions, the crews of vessels, shipwrecked on some barbarous coast, are eaten alive like so many dainty joints by the uncivil inhabitants; and unfortunate voyagers are lured into smiling and treacherous bays; knocked on the head with outlandish war-clubs; and served up without any prelimary dressing. </span>
      <span id="f02668">In truth, so horrific and improbable are these accounts, that many sensible and well-informed people will not believe that any cannibals exist; and place every book of voyages which purports to give any account of them, on the same shelf with Blue Beard and Jack the Giant-Killer. </span>
      <span id="f02669">While others, implicitly crediting the most extravagant fictions, firmly believe that there are people in the world with tastes so depraved that they would infinitely prefer a single mouthful of material humanity to a good dinner of roast beef and plum pudding. </span>
      <span id="f02670">But here, Truth, who loves to be centrally located, is again found between the two extremes; for cannibalism to a certain moderate extent is practised among several of the primitive tribes in the Pacific, but it is upon the bodies of slain enemies alone, and horrible and fearful as the custom is, immeasurably as it is to be abhorred and condemned, still I assert that those who indulge in it are in other respects humane and virtuous.</span>
      </p>
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>