<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
      <p>
      <span id="f02671">CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02672">FISHING PARTIES--MODE OF DISTRIBUTING THE FISH--MIDNIGHT BANQUET--TIME-KEEPING TAPERS--UNCEREMONIOUS STYLE OF EATING THE FISH</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02673">THERE was no instance in which the social and kindly dispositions of the Typees were more forcibly evinced than in the manner the conducted their great fishing parties. </span>
      <span id="f02674">Four times during my stay in the valley the young men assembled near the full of the moon, and went together on these excursions. </span>
      <span id="f02675">As they were generally absent about forty-eight hours, I was led to believe that they went out towards the open sea, some distance from the bay. </span>
      <span id="f02676">The Polynesians seldom use a hook and line, almost always employing large well-made nets, most ingeniously fabricated from the twisted fibres of a certain bark. </span>
      <span id="f02677">I examined several of them which had been spread to dry upon the beach at Nukuheva. </span>
      <span id="f02678">They resemble very much our own seines, and I should think they were nearly as durable.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02679">All the South Sea Islanders are passionately fond of fish; but none of them can be more so than the inhabitants of Typee. </span>
      <span id="f02680">I could not comprehend, therefore, why they so seldom sought it in their waters, for it was only at stated times that the fishing parties were formed, and these occasions were always looked forward to with no small degree of interest.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02681">During their absence the whole population of the place were in a ferment, and nothing was talked of but ‘pehee, pehee’ (fish, fish). </span>
      <span id="f02682">Towards the time when they were expected to return the vocal telegraph was put into operation--the inhabitants, who were scattered throughout the length of the valley, leaped upon rocks and into trees, shouting with delight at the thoughts of the anticipated treat. </span>
      <span id="f02683">As soon as the approach of the party was announced, there was a general rush of the men towards the beach; some of them remaining, however, about the Ti in order to get matters in readiness for the reception of the fish, which were brought to the Taboo Groves in immense packages of leaves, each one of them being suspended from a pole carried on the shoulders of two men.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02684">I was present at the Ti on one of these occasions, and the sight was most interesting. </span>
      <span id="f02685">After all the packages had arrived, they were laid in a row under the verandah of the building and opened.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02686">The fish were all quite small, generally about the size of a herring, and of every variety. </span>
      <span id="f02687">About one-eighth of the whole being reserved for the use of the Ti itself, the remainder was divided into numerous smaller packages, which were immediately dispatched in every direction to the remotest parts of the valley. </span>
      <span id="f02688">Arrived at their destination, these were in turn portioned out, and equally distributed among the various houses of each particular district. </span>
      <span id="f02689">The fish were under a strict Taboo, until the distribution was completed, which seemed to be effected in the most impartial manner. </span>
      <span id="f02690">By the operation of this system every man, woman, and child in the vale, were at one and the same time partaking of this favourite article of food.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02691">Once I remember the party arrived at midnight; but the unseasonableness of the tour did not repress the impatience of the islanders. </span>
      <span id="f02692">The carriers dispatched from the Ti were to be seen hurrying in all directions through the deep groves; each individual preceded by a boy bearing a flaming torch of dried cocoanut boughs, which from time to time was replenished from the materials scattered along the path. </span>
      <span id="f02693">The wild glare of these enormous flambeaux, lighting up with a startling brilliancy the innermost recesses of the vale, and seen moving rapidly along beneath the canopy of leaves, the savage shout of the excited messengers sounding the news of their approach, which was answered on all sides, and the strange appearance of their naked bodies, seen against the gloomy background, produced altogether an effect upon my mind that I shall long remember.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02694">It was on this same occasion that Kory-Kory awakened me at the dead hour of night, and in a sort of transport communicated the intelligence contained in the words ‘pehee perni’ (fish come). </span>
      <span id="f02695">As I happened to have been in a remarkably sound and refreshing slumber, I could not imagine why the information had not been deferred until morning, indeed, I felt very much inclined to fly into a passion and box my valet’s ears; but on second thoughts I got quietly up, and on going outside the house was not a little interested by the moving illumination which I beheld.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02696">When old Marheyo received his share of the spoils, immediate preparations were made for a midnight banquet; calabashes of poee-poee were filled to the brim; green bread-fruit were roasted; and a huge cake of ‘amar’ was cut up with a sliver of bamboo and laid out on an immense banana-leaf.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02697">At this supper we were lighted by several of the native tapers, held in the hands of young girls. </span>
      <span id="f02698">These tapers are most ingeniously made. </span>
      <span id="f02699">There is a nut abounding in the valley, called by the Typees ‘armor’, closely resembling our common horse-chestnut. </span>
      <span id="f02700">The shell is broken, and the contents extracted whole. </span>
      <span id="f02701">Any number of these are strung at pleasure upon the long elastic fibre that traverses the branches of the cocoanut tree. </span>
      <span id="f02702">Some of these tapers are eight or ten feet in length; but being perfectly flexible, one end is held in a coil, while the other is lighted. </span>
      <span id="f02703">The nut burns with a fitful bluish flame, and the oil that it contains is exhausted in about ten minutes. </span>
      <span id="f02704">As one burns down, the next becomes ignited, and the ashes of the former are knocked into a cocoanut shell kept for the purpose. </span>
      <span id="f02705">This primitive candle requires continual attention, and must be constantly held in the hand. </span>
      <span id="f02706">The person so employed marks the lapse of time by the number of nuts consumed, which is easily learned by counting the bits of tappa distributed at regular intervals along the string.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02707">I grieve to state so distressing a fact, but the inhabitants of Typee were in the habit of devouring fish much in the same way that a civilized being would eat a radish, and without any more previous preparation. </span>
      <span id="f02708">They eat it raw; scales, bones, gills, and all the inside. </span>
      <span id="f02709">The fish is held by the tail, and the head being introduced into the mouth, the animal disappears with a rapidity that would at first nearly lead one to imagine it had been launched bodily down the throat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02710">Raw fish! </span>
      <span id="f02711">Shall I ever forget my sensations when I first saw my island beauty devour one. </span>
      <span id="f02712">Oh, heavens! </span>
      <span id="f02713">Fayaway, how could you ever have contracted so vile a habit? </span>
      <span id="f02714">However, after the first shock had subsided, the custom grew less odious in my eyes, and I soon accustomed myself to the sight. </span>
      <span id="f02715">Let no one imagine, however, that the lovely Fayaway was in the habit of swallowing great vulgar-looking fishes: oh, no; with her beautiful small hand she would clasp a delicate, little, golden-hued love of a fish and eat it as elegantly and as innocently as though it were a Naples biscuit. </span>
      <span id="f02716">But alas! </span>
      <span id="f02717">it was after all a raw fish; and all I can say is, that Fayaway ate it in a more ladylike manner than any other girl of the valley.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f02718">When at Rome do as the Romans do, I held to be so good a proverb, that being in Typee I made a point of doing as the Typees did. </span>
      <span id="f02719">Thus I ate poee-poee as they did; I walked about in a garb striking for its simplicity; and I reposed on a community of couches; besides doing many other things in conformity with their peculiar habits; but the farthest I ever went in the way of conformity, was on several occasions to regale myself with raw fish. </span>
      <span id="f02720">These being remarkably tender, and quite small, the undertaking was not so disagreeable in the main, and after a few trials I positively began to relish them; however, I subjected them to a slight operation with a knife previously to making my repast.</span>
      </p>
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>