<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
      <p>
      <span id="f03211">CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03212">THE ESCAPE</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03213">NEARLY three weeks had elapsed since the second visit of Marnoo, and it must have been more than four months since I entered the valley, when one day about noon, and whilst everything was in profound silence, Mow-Mow, the one-eyed chief, suddenly appeared at the door, and leaning towards me as I lay directly facing him, said in a low tone, ‘Toby pemi ena’ (Toby has arrived here). </span>
      <span id="f03214">Gracious heaven! </span>
      <span id="f03215">What a tumult of emotions rushed upon me at this startling intelligence! </span>
      <span id="f03216">Insensible to the pain that had before distracted me, I leaped to my feet, and called wildly to Kory-Kory who was reposing by my side. </span>
      <span id="f03217">The startled islanders sprang from their mats; the news was quickly communicated to them; and the next moment I was making my way to the Ti on the back of Kory-Kory; and surrounded by the excited savages.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03218">All that I could comprehend of the particulars which Mow-Mow rehearsed to his audience as we proceeded, was that my long-lost companion had arrived in a boat which had just entered the bay. </span>
      <span id="f03219">These tidings made me most anxious to be carried at once to the sea, lest some untoward circumstance should prevent our meeting; but to this they would not consent, and continued their course towards the royal abode. </span>
      <span id="f03220">As we approached it, Mehevi and several chiefs showed themselves from the piazza, and called upon us loudly to come to them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03221">As soon as we had approached, I endeavoured to make them understand that I was going down to the sea to meet Toby. </span>
      <span id="f03222">To this the king objected, and motioned Kory-Kory to bring me into the house. </span>
      <span id="f03223">It was in vain to resist; and in a few moments I found myself within the Ti, surrounded by a noisy group engaged in discussing the recent intelligence. </span>
      <span id="f03224">Toby’s name was frequently repeated, coupled with violent exclamations of astonishment. </span>
      <span id="f03225">It seemed as if they yet remained in doubt with regard to the fact of his arrival, at at every fresh report that was brought from the shore they betrayed the liveliest emotions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03226">Almost frenzied at being held in this state of suspense, I passionately besought Mehevi to permit me to proceed. </span>
      <span id="f03227">Whether my companion had arrived or not, I felt a presentiment that my own fate was about to be decided. </span>
      <span id="f03228">Again and again I renewed my petition to Mehevi. </span>
      <span id="f03229">He regarded me with a fixed and serious eye, but at length yielding to my importunity, reluctantly granted my request.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03230">Accompanied by some fifty of the natives, I now rapidly continued my journey; every few moments being transferred from the back of one to another, and urging my bearer forward all the while with earnest entreaties. </span>
      <span id="f03231">As I thus hurried forward, no doubt as to the truth of the information I had received ever crossed my mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03232">I was alive only to the one overwhelming idea, that a chance of deliverance was now afforded me, if the jealous opposition of the savages could be overcome.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03233">Having been prohibited from approaching the sea during the whole of my stay in the valley, I had always associated with it the idea of escape. </span>
      <span id="f03234">Toby too--if indeed he had ever voluntarily deserted me--must have effected this flight by the sea; and now that I was drawing near to it myself, I indulged in hopes which I had never felt before. </span>
      <span id="f03235">It was evident that a boat had entered the bay, and I saw little reason to doubt the truth of the report that it had brought my companion. </span>
      <span id="f03236">Every time therefore that we gained an elevation, I looked eagerly around, hoping to behold him. </span>
      <span id="f03237">In the midst of an excited throng, who by their violent gestures and wild cries appeared to be under the influence of some excitement as strong as my own, I was now borne along at a rapid trot, frequently stooping my head to avoid the branches which crossed the path, and never ceasing to implore those who carried me to accelerate their already swift pace.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03238">In this manner we had proceeded about four or five miles, when we were met by a party of some twenty islanders, between whom and those who accompanied me ensued an animated conference. </span>
      <span id="f03239">Impatient of the delay occasioned by this interruption, I was beseeching the man who carried me to proceed without his loitering companions, when Kory-Kory, running to my side, informed me, in three fatal words, that the news had all proved, false--that Toby had not arrived--‘Toby owlee pemi’. </span>
      <span id="f03240">Heaven only knows how, in the state of mind and body I then was, I ever sustained the agony which this intelligence caused me; not that the news was altogether unexpected; but I had trusted that the fact might not have been made known until we should have arrived upon the beach. </span>
      <span id="f03241">As it was, I at once foresaw the course the savages would pursue. </span>
      <span id="f03242">They had only yielded thus far to my entreaties, that I might give a joyful welcome to my long-lost comrade; but now that it was known he had not arrived they would at once oblige me to turn back.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03243">My anticipations were but too correct. </span>
      <span id="f03244">In spite of the resistance I made, they carried me into a house which was near the spot, and left me upon the mats. </span>
      <span id="f03245">Shortly afterwards several of those who had accompanied me from the Ti, detaching themselves from the others, proceeded in the direction of the sea. </span>
      <span id="f03246">Those who remained--among whom were Marheyo, Mow-Mow, Kory-Kory, and Tinor--gathered about the dwelling, and appeared to be awaiting their return.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03247">This convinced me that strangers--perhaps some of my own countrymen--had for some cause or other entered the bay. </span>
      <span id="f03248">Distracted at the idea of their vicinity, and reckless of the pain which I suffered, I heeded not the assurances of the islanders, that there were no boats at the beach, but starting to my feet endeavoured to gain the door. </span>
      <span id="f03249">Instantly the passage was blocked up by several men, who commanded me to resume my seat. </span>
      <span id="f03250">The fierce looks of the irritated savages admonished me that I could gain nothing by force, and that it was by entreaty alone that I could hope to compass my object.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03251">Guided by this consideration, I turned to Mow-Mow, the only chief present whom I had been much in the habit of seeing, and carefully concealing, my real design, tried to make him comprehend that I still believed Toby to have arrived on the shore, and besought him to allow me to go forward to welcome him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03252">To all his repeated assertions, that my companion had not been seen, I pretended to turn a deaf ear, while I urged my solicitations with an eloquence of gesture which the one-eyed chief appeared unable to resist. </span>
      <span id="f03253">He seemed indeed to regard me as a forward child, to whose wishes he had not the heart to oppose force, and whom he must consequently humour. </span>
      <span id="f03254">He spoke a few words to the natives, who at once retreated from the door, and I immediately passed out of the house.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03255">Here I looked earnestly round for Kory-Kory; but that hitherto faithful servitor was nowhere to be seen. </span>
      <span id="f03256">Unwilling to linger even for a single instant when every moment might be so important, I motioned to a muscular fellow near me to take me upon his back; to my surprise he angrily refused. </span>
      <span id="f03257">I turned to another, but with a like result. </span>
      <span id="f03258">A third attempt was as unsuccessful, and I immediately perceived what had induced Mow-Mow to grant my request, and why the other natives conducted themselves in so strange a manner. </span>
      <span id="f03259">It was evident that the chief had only given me liberty to continue my progress towards the sea, because he supposed that I was deprived of the means of reaching it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03260">Convinced by this of their determination to retain me a captive, I became desperate; and almost insensible to the pain which I suffered, I seized a spear which was leaning against the projecting eaves of the house, and supporting myself with it, resumed the path that swept by the dwelling. </span>
      <span id="f03261">To my surprise, I was suffered to proceed alone; all the natives remaining in front of the house, and engaging in earnest conversation, which every moment became more loud and vehement; and to my unspeakable delight, I perceived that some difference of opinion had arisen between them; that two parties, in short, were formed, and consequently that in their divided counsels there was some chance of my deliverance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03262">Before I had proceeded a hundred yards I was again surrounded by the savages, who were still in all the heat of argument, and appeared every moment as if they would come to blows. </span>
      <span id="f03263">In the midst of this tumult old Marheyo came to my side, and I shall never forget the benevolent expression of his countenance. </span>
      <span id="f03264">He placed his arm upon my shoulder, and emphatically pronounced the only two English words I had taught him ‘Home’ and ‘Mother’. </span>
      <span id="f03265">I at once understood what he meant, and eagerly expressed my thanks to him. </span>
      <span id="f03266">Fayaway and Kory-Kory were by his side, both weeping violently; and it was not until the old man had twice repeated the command that his son could bring himself to obey him, and take me again upon his back. </span>
      <span id="f03267">The one-eyed chief opposed his doing so, but he was overruled, and, as it seemed to me, by some of his own party.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03268">We proceeded onwards, and never shall I forget the ecstasy I felt when I first heard the roar of the surf breaking upon the beach. </span>
      <span id="f03269">Before long I saw the flashing billows themselves through the opening between the trees. </span>
      <span id="f03270">Oh glorious sight and sound of ocean! </span>
      <span id="f03271">with what rapture did I hail you as familiar friends! </span>
      <span id="f03272">By this time the shouts of the crowd upon the beach were distinctly audible, and in the blended confusion of sounds I almost fancied I could distinguish the voices of my own countrymen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03273">When we reached the open space which lay between the groves and the sea, the first object that met my view was an English whale-boat, lying with her bow pointed from the shore, and only a few fathoms distant from it. </span>
      <span id="f03274">It was manned by five islanders, dressed in shirt tunics of calico. </span>
      <span id="f03275">My first impression was that they were in the very act of pulling out from the bay; and that, after all my exertions, I had come too late. </span>
      <span id="f03276">My soul sunk within me: but a second glance convinced me that the boat was only hanging off to keep out of the surf; and the next moment I heard my own name shouted out by a voice from the midst of the crowd.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03277">Looking in the direction of the sound, I perceived, to my indescribable joy, the tall figure of Karakoee, an Oahu Kanaka, who had often been aboard the ‘Dolly’, while she lay in Nukuheva. </span>
      <span id="f03278">He wore the green shooting-jacket with gilt buttons, which had been given to him by an officer of the Reine Blanche--the French flag-ship--and in which I had always seen him dressed. </span>
      <span id="f03279">I now remembered the Kanaka had frequently told me that his person was tabooed in all the valleys of the island, and the sight of him at such a moment as this filled my heart with a tumult of delight.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03280">Karakoee stood near the edge of the water with a large roll of cotton-cloth thrown over one arm, and holding two or three canvas bags of powder, while with the other hand he grasped a musket, which he appeared to be proffering to several of the chiefs around him. </span>
      <span id="f03281">But they turned with disgust from his offers and seemed to be impatient at his presence, with vehement gestures waving him off to his boat, and commanding him to depart.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03282">The Kanaka, however, still maintained his ground, and I at once perceived that he was seeking to purchase my freedom. </span>
      <span id="f03283">Animated by the idea, I called upon him loudly to come to me; but he replied, in broken English, that the islanders had threatened to pierce him with their spears, if he stirred a foot towards me. </span>
      <span id="f03284">At this time I was still advancing, surrounded by a dense throng of the natives, several of whom had their hands upon me, and more than one javelin was threateningly pointed at me. </span>
      <span id="f03285">Still I perceived clearly that many of those least friendly towards me looked irresolute and anxious. </span>
      <span id="f03286">I was still some thirty yards from Karakoee when my farther progress was prevented by the natives, who compelled me to sit down upon the ground, while they still retained their hold upon my arms. </span>
      <span id="f03287">The din and tumult now became tenfold, and I perceived that several of the priests were on the spot, all of whom were evidently urging Mow-Mow and the other chiefs to prevent my departure; and the detestable word ‘Roo-ne! </span>
      <span id="f03288">Roo-ne!’ which I had heard repeated a thousand times during the day, was now shouted out on every side of me. </span>
      <span id="f03289">Still I saw that the Kanaka continued his exertions in my favour--that he was boldly debating the matter with the savages, and was striving to entice them by displaying his cloth and powder, and snapping the lock of his musket. </span>
      <span id="f03290">But all he said or did appeared only to augment the clamours of those around him, who seemed bent upon driving him into the sea.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03291">When I remembered the extravagant value placed by these people upon the articles which were offered to them in exchange for me, and which were so indignantly rejected, I saw a new proof of the same fixed determination of purpose they had all along manifested with regard to me, and in despair, and reckless of consequences, I exerted all my strength, and shaking myself free from the grasp of those who held me, I sprang upon my feet and rushed towards Karakoee.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03292">The rash attempt nearly decided my fate; for, fearful that I might slip from them, several of the islanders now raised a simultaneous shout, and pressing upon Karakoee, they menaced him with furious gestures, and actually forced him into the sea. </span>
      <span id="f03293">Appalled at their violence, the poor fellow, standing nearly to the waist in the surf, endeavoured to pacify them; but at length fearful that they would do him some fatal violence, he beckoned to his comrades to pull in at once, and take him into the boat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03294">It was at this agonizing moment, when I thought all hope was ended, that a new contest arose between the two parties who had accompanied me to the shore; blows were struck, wounds were given, and blood flowed. </span>
      <span id="f03295">In the interest excited by the fray, every one had left me except Marheyo, Kory-Kory and poor dear Fayaway, who clung to me, sobbing indignantly. </span>
      <span id="f03296">I saw that now or never was the moment. </span>
      <span id="f03297">Clasping my hands together, I looked imploringly at Marheyo, and move towards the now almost deserted beach. </span>
      <span id="f03298">The tears were in the old man’s eyes, but neither he nor Kory-Kory attempted to hold me, and I soon reached the Kanaka, who had anxiously watched my movements; the rowers pulled in as near as they dared to the edge of the surf; I gave one parting embrace to Fayaway, who seemed speechless with sorrow, and the next instant I found myself safe in the boat, and Karakoee by my side, who told the rowers at once to give way. </span>
      <span id="f03299">Marheyo and Kory-Kory, and a great many of the women, followed me into the water, and I was determined, as the only mark of gratitude I could show, to give them the articles which had been brought as my ransom. </span>
      <span id="f03300">I handed the musket to Kory-Kory, with a rapid gesture which was equivalent to a ‘Deed of Gift’; threw the roll of cotton to old Marheyo, pointing as I did so to poor Fayaway, who had retired from the edge of the water and was sitting down disconsolate on the shingles; and tumbled the powder-bags out to the nearest young ladies, all of whom were vastly willing to take them. </span>
      <span id="f03301">This distribution did not occupy ten seconds, and before it was over the boat was under full way; the Kanaka all the while exclaiming loudly against what he considered a useless throwing away of valuable property.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03302">Although it was clear that my movements had been noticed by several of the natives, still they had not suspended the conflict in which they were engaged, and it was not until the boat was above fifty yards from the shore that Mow-Mow and some six or seven other warriors rushed into the sea and hurled their javelins at us. </span>
      <span id="f03303">Some of the weapons passed quite as close to us as was desirable, but no one was wounded, and the men pulled away gallantly. </span>
      <span id="f03304">But although soon out of the reach of the spears, our progress was extremely slow; it blew strong upon the shore, and the tide was against us; and I saw Karakoee, who was steering the boat, give many a look towards a jutting point of the bay round which we had to pass.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03305">For a minute or two after our departure, the savages, who had formed into different groups, remained perfectly motionless and silent. </span>
      <span id="f03306">All at-once the enraged chief showed by his gestures that he had resolved what course he would take. </span>
      <span id="f03307">Shouting loudly to his companions, and pointing with his tomahawk towards the headland, he set off at full speed in that direction, and was followed by about thirty of the natives, among whom were several of the priests, all yelling out ‘Roo-ne! </span>
      <span id="f03308">Roo-ne!’ at the very top of their voices. </span>
      <span id="f03309">Their intention was evidently to swim off from the headland and intercept us in our course. </span>
      <span id="f03310">The wind was freshening every minute, and was right in our teeth, and it was one of those chopping angry seas in which it is so difficult to row. </span>
      <span id="f03311">Still the chances seemed in our favour, but when we came within a hundred yards of the point, the active savages were already dashing into the water, and we all feared that within five minutes’ time we should have a score of the infuriated wretches around us. </span>
      <span id="f03312">If so our doom was sealed, for these savages, unlike the feeble swimmer of civilized countries, are, if anything, more formidable antagonists in the water than when on the land. </span>
      <span id="f03313">It was all a trial of strength; our natives pulled till their oars bent again, and the crowd of swimmers shot through the water despite its roughness, with fearful rapidity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03314">By the time we had reached the headland, the savages were spread right across our course. </span>
      <span id="f03315">Our rowers got out their knives and held them ready between their teeth, and I seized the boat-hook. </span>
      <span id="f03316">We were all aware that if they succeeded in intercepting us they would practise upon us the manoeuvre which has proved so fatal to many a boat’s crew in these seas. </span>
      <span id="f03317">They would grapple the oars, and seizing hold of the gunwhale, capsize the boat, and then we should be entirely at their mercy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03318">After a few breathless moments discerned Mow-Mow. </span>
      <span id="f03319">The athletic islander, with his tomahawk between his teeth, was dashing the water before him till it foamed again. </span>
      <span id="f03320">He was the nearest to us, and in another instant he would have seized one of the oars. </span>
      <span id="f03321">Even at the moment I felt horror at the act I was about to commit; but it was no time for pity or compunction, and with a true aim, and exerting all my strength, I dashed the boat-hook at him. </span>
      <span id="f03322">It struck him just below the throat, and forced him downwards. </span>
      <span id="f03323">I had no time to repeat the blow, but I saw him rise to the surface in the wake of the boat, and never shall I forget the ferocious expression of his countenance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03324">Only one other of the savages reached the boat. </span>
      <span id="f03325">He seized the gunwhale, but the knives of our rowers so mauled his wrists, that he was forced to quit his hold, and the next minute we were past them all, and in safety. </span>
      <span id="f03326">The strong excitement which had thus far kept me up, now left me, and I fell back fainting into the arms of Karakoee.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03327">. </span>
      <span id="f03328">. </span>
      <span id="f03329">. </span>
      <span id="f03330">. </span>
      <span id="f03331">. </span>
      <span id="f03332">. </span>
      <span id="f03333">. </span>
      <span id="f03334">.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03335">The circumstances connected with my most unexpected escape may be very briefly stated. </span>
      <span id="f03336">The captain of an Australian vessel, being in distress for men in these remote seas, had put into Nukuheva in order to recruit his ship’s company; but not a single man was to be obtained; and the barque was about to get under weigh, when she was boarded by Karakoee, who informed the disappointed Englishman that an American sailor was detained by the savages in the neighbouring bay of Typee; and he offered, if supplied with suitable articles of traffic, to undertake his release. </span>
      <span id="f03337">The Kanaka had gained his intelligence from Marnoo, to whom, after all, I was indebted for my escape. </span>
      <span id="f03338">The proposition was acceded to; and Karakoee, taking with him five tabooed natives of Nukuheva, again repaired aboard the barque, which in a few hours sailed to that part of the island, and threw her main-top-sail aback right off the entrance to the Typee bay. </span>
      <span id="f03339">The whale-boat, manned by the tabooed crew, pulled towards the head of the inlet, while the ship lay ‘off and on’ awaiting its return.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03340">The events which ensued have already been detailed, and little more remains to be related. </span>
      <span id="f03341">On reaching the ‘Julia’ I was lifted over the side, and my strange appearance and remarkable adventure occasioned the liveliest interest. </span>
      <span id="f03342">Every attention was bestowed upon me that humanity could suggest. </span>
      <span id="f03343">But to such a state was I reduced, that three months elapsed before I recovered my health.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f03344">The mystery which hung over the fate of my friend and companion Toby has never been cleared up. </span>
      <span id="f03345">I still remain ignorant whether he succeeded in leaving the valley, or perished at the hands of the islanders.</span>
      </p>
      <hr class="sepBar"/>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>