<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER I</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0003">CHAPTER I</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0004">The one opened the door with a latch-key and went in, followed by a young fellow who awkwardly removed his cap. </span>
      <span id="f0005"> He wore rough clothes that smacked of the sea, and he was manifestly out of place in the spacious hall in which he found himself. </span>
      <span id="f0006"> He did not know what to do with his cap, and was stuffing it into his coat pocket when the other took it from him. </span>
      <span id="f0007"> The act was done quietly and naturally, and the awkward young fellow appreciated it. </span>
      <span id="f0008"> &#34;He understands,&#34; was his thought. </span>
      <span id="f0009"> &#34;He&#39;ll see me through all right.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0010">He walked at the other&#39;s heels with a swing to his shoulders, and his legs spread unwittingly, as if the level floors were tilting up and sinking down to the heave and lunge of the sea. </span>
      <span id="f0011"> The wide rooms seemed too narrow for his rolling gait, and to himself he was in terror lest his broad shoulders should collide with the doorways or sweep the bric-a-brac from the low mantel. </span>
      <span id="f0012"> He recoiled from side to side between the various objects and multiplied the hazards that in reality lodged only in his mind. </span>
      <span id="f0013"> Between a grand piano and a centre-table piled high with books was space for a half a dozen to walk abreast, yet he essayed it with trepidation. </span>
      <span id="f0014"> His heavy arms hung loosely at his sides. </span>
      <span id="f0015"> He did not know what to do with those arms and hands, and when, to his excited vision, one arm seemed liable to brush against the books on the table, he lurched away like a frightened horse, barely missing the piano stool. </span>
      <span id="f0016"> He watched the easy walk of the other in front of him, and for the first time realized that his walk was different from that of other men. </span>
      <span id="f0017"> He experienced a momentary pang of shame that he should walk so uncouthly. </span>
      <span id="f0018">The sweat burst through the skin of his forehead in tiny beads, and he paused and mopped his bronzed face with his handkerchief.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0019">&#34;Hold on, Arthur, my boy,&#34; he said, attempting to mask his anxiety with facetious utterance. </span>
      <span id="f0020"> &#34;This is too much all at once for yours truly. </span>
      <span id="f0021"> Give me a chance to get my nerve. </span>
      <span id="f0022"> You know I didn&#39;t want to come, an&#39; I guess your fam&#39;ly ain&#39;t hankerin&#39; to see me neither.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0023">&#34;That&#39;s all right,&#34; was the reassuring answer. </span>
      <span id="f0024"> &#34;You mustn&#39;t be frightened at us. </span>
      <span id="f0025"> We&#39;re just homely people--Hello, there&#39;s a letter for me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0026">He stepped back to the table, tore open the envelope, and began to read, giving the stranger an opportunity to recover himself. </span>
      <span id="f0027"> And the stranger understood and appreciated. </span>
      <span id="f0028"> His was the gift of sympathy, understanding; and beneath his alarmed exterior that sympathetic process went on. </span>
      <span id="f0029"> He mopped his forehead dry and glanced about him with a controlled face, though in the eyes there was an expression such as wild animals betray when they fear the trap. </span>
      <span id="f0030"> He was surrounded by the unknown, apprehensive of what might happen, ignorant of what he should do, aware that he walked and bore himself awkwardly, fearful that every attribute and power of him was similarly afflicted. </span>
      <span id="f0031"> He was keenly sensitive, hopelessly self-conscious, and the amused glance that the other stole privily at him over the top of the letter burned into him like a dagger-thrust. </span>
      <span id="f0032"> He saw the glance, but he gave no sign, for among the things he had learned was discipline. </span>
      <span id="f0033"> Also, that dagger-thrust went to his pride. </span>
      <span id="f0034"> He cursed himself for having come, and at the same time resolved that, happen what would, having come, he would carry it through. </span>
      <span id="f0035"> The lines of his face hardened, and into his eyes came a fighting light. </span>
      <span id="f0036"> He looked about more unconcernedly, sharply observant, every detail of the pretty interior registering itself on his brain. </span>
      <span id="f0037"> His eyes were wide apart; nothing in their field of vision escaped; and as they drank in the beauty before them the fighting light died out and a warm glow took its place. </span>
      <span id="f0038"> He was responsive to beauty, and here was cause to respond.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0039">An oil painting caught and held him. </span>
      <span id="f0040"> A heavy surf thundered and burst over an outjutting rock; lowering storm-clouds covered the sky; and, outside the line of surf, a pilot-schooner, close-hauled, heeled over till every detail of her deck was visible, was surging along against a stormy sunset sky. </span>
      <span id="f0041"> There was beauty, and it drew him irresistibly. </span>
      <span id="f0042"> He forgot his awkward walk and came closer to the painting, very close. </span>
      <span id="f0043"> The beauty faded out of the canvas. </span>
      <span id="f0044"> His face expressed his bepuzzlement. </span>
      <span id="f0045"> He stared at what seemed a careless daub of paint, then stepped away. </span>
      <span id="f0046">Immediately all the beauty flashed back into the canvas. </span>
      <span id="f0047"> &#34;A trick picture,&#34; was his thought, as he dismissed it, though in the midst of the multitudinous impressions he was receiving he found time to feel a prod of indignation that so much beauty should be sacrificed to make a trick. </span>
      <span id="f0048">He did not know painting. </span>
      <span id="f0049"> He had been brought up on chromos and lithographs that were always definite and sharp, near or far. </span>
      <span id="f0050"> He had seen oil paintings, it was true, in the show windows of shops, but the glass of the windows had prevented his eager eyes from approaching too near.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0051">He glanced around at his friend reading the letter and saw the books on the table. </span>
      <span id="f0052"> Into his eyes leaped a wistfulness and a yearning as promptly as the yearning leaps into the eyes of a starving man at sight of food. </span>
      <span id="f0053">An impulsive stride, with one lurch to right and left of the shoulders, brought him to the table, where he began affectionately handling the books. </span>
      <span id="f0054"> He glanced at the titles and the authors&#39; names, read fragments of text, caressing the volumes with his eyes and hands, and, once, recognized a book he had read. </span>
      <span id="f0055"> For the rest, they were strange books and strange authors. </span>
      <span id="f0056"> He chanced upon a volume of Swinburne and began reading steadily, forgetful of where he was, his face glowing. </span>
      <span id="f0057"> Twice he closed the book on his forefinger to look at the name of the author. </span>
      <span id="f0058"> Swinburne! </span>
      <span id="f0059">he would remember that name. </span>
      <span id="f0060"> That fellow had eyes, and he had certainly seen color and flashing light. </span>
      <span id="f0061"> But who was Swinburne? </span>
      <span id="f0062"> Was he dead a hundred years or so, like most of the poets? </span>
      <span id="f0063"> Or was he alive still, and writing? </span>
      <span id="f0064"> He turned to the title-page . </span>
      <span id="f0065">. </span>
      <span id="f0066">. </span>
      <span id="f0067">yes, he had written other books; well, he would go to the free library the first thing in the morning and try to get hold of some of Swinburne&#39;s stuff. </span>
      <span id="f0068"> He went back to the text and lost himself. </span>
      <span id="f0069"> He did not notice that a young woman had entered the room. </span>
      <span id="f0070"> The first he knew was when he heard Arthur&#39;s voice saying:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0071">&#34;Ruth, this is Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0072">Eden.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0073">The book was closed on his forefinger, and before he turned he was thrilling to the first new impression, which was not of the girl, but of her brother&#39;s words. </span>
      <span id="f0074"> Under that muscled body of his he was a mass of quivering sensibilities. </span>
      <span id="f0075"> At the slightest impact of the outside world upon his consciousness, his thoughts, sympathies, and emotions leapt and played like lambent flame. </span>
      <span id="f0076"> He was extraordinarily receptive and responsive, while his imagination, pitched high, was ever at work establishing relations of likeness and difference. </span>
      <span id="f0077"> &#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0078">Eden,&#34; was what he had thrilled to--he who had been called &#34;Eden,&#34; or &#34;Martin Eden,&#34; or just &#34;Martin,&#34; all his life. </span>
      <span id="f0079"> And &#34;_Mister_!&#34;  It was certainly going some, was his internal comment. </span>
      <span id="f0080"> His mind seemed to turn, on the instant, into a vast camera obscura, and he saw arrayed around his consciousness endless pictures from his life, of stoke-holes and forecastles, camps and beaches, jails and boozing-kens, fever-hospitals and slum streets, wherein the thread of association was the fashion in which he had been addressed in those various situations.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0081">And then he turned and saw the girl. </span>
      <span id="f0082"> The phantasmagoria of his brain vanished at sight of her. </span>
      <span id="f0083"> She was a pale, ethereal creature, with wide, spiritual blue eyes and a wealth of golden hair. </span>
      <span id="f0084"> He did not know how she was dressed, except that the dress was as wonderful as she. </span>
      <span id="f0085"> He likened her to a pale gold flower upon a slender stem. </span>
      <span id="f0086"> No, she was a spirit, a divinity, a goddess; such sublimated beauty was not of the earth. </span>
      <span id="f0087"> Or perhaps the books were right, and there were many such as she in the upper walks of life. </span>
      <span id="f0088"> She might well be sung by that chap, Swinburne. </span>
      <span id="f0089">Perhaps he had had somebody like her in mind when he painted that girl, Iseult, in the book there on the table. </span>
      <span id="f0090"> All this plethora of sight, and feeling, and thought occurred on the instant. </span>
      <span id="f0091"> There was no pause of the realities wherein he moved. </span>
      <span id="f0092"> He saw her hand coming out to his, and she looked him straight in the eyes as she shook hands, frankly, like a man. </span>
      <span id="f0093">The women he had known did not shake hands that way. </span>
      <span id="f0094"> For that matter, most of them did not shake hands at all. </span>
      <span id="f0095"> A flood of associations, visions of various ways he had made the acquaintance of women, rushed into his mind and threatened to swamp it. </span>
      <span id="f0096"> But he shook them aside and looked at her. </span>
      <span id="f0097"> Never had he seen such a woman. </span>
      <span id="f0098"> The women he had known! </span>
      <span id="f0099">Immediately, beside her, on either hand, ranged the women he had known. </span>
      <span id="f0100">For an eternal second he stood in the midst of a portrait gallery, wherein she occupied the central place, while about her were limned many women, all to be weighed and measured by a fleeting glance, herself the unit of weight and measure. </span>
      <span id="f0101"> He saw the weak and sickly faces of the girls of the factories, and the simpering, boisterous girls from the south of Market. </span>
      <span id="f0102"> There were women of the cattle camps, and swarthy cigarette-smoking women of Old Mexico. </span>
      <span id="f0103"> These, in turn, were crowded out by Japanese women, doll-like, stepping mincingly on wooden clogs; by Eurasians, delicate featured, stamped with degeneracy; by full-bodied South-Sea-Island women, flower-crowned and brown-skinned. </span>
      <span id="f0104"> All these were blotted out by a grotesque and terrible nightmare brood--frowsy, shuffling creatures from the pavements of Whitechapel, gin-bloated hags of the stews, and all the vast hell&#39;s following of harpies, vile-mouthed and filthy, that under the guise of monstrous female form prey upon sailors, the scrapings of the ports, the scum and slime of the human pit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0105">&#34;Won&#39;t you sit down, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0106">Eden?&#34; the girl was saying. </span>
      <span id="f0107"> &#34;I have been looking forward to meeting you ever since Arthur told us. </span>
      <span id="f0108"> It was brave of you--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0109">He waved his hand deprecatingly and muttered that it was nothing at all, what he had done, and that any fellow would have done it. </span>
      <span id="f0110"> She noticed that the hand he waved was covered with fresh abrasions, in the process of healing, and a glance at the other loose-hanging hand showed it to be in the same condition. </span>
      <span id="f0111"> Also, with quick, critical eye, she noted a scar on his cheek, another that peeped out from under the hair of the forehead, and a third that ran down and disappeared under the starched collar. </span>
      <span id="f0112"> She repressed a smile at sight of the red line that marked the chafe of the collar against the bronzed neck. </span>
      <span id="f0113"> He was evidently unused to stiff collars. </span>
      <span id="f0114"> Likewise her feminine eye took in the clothes he wore, the cheap and unaesthetic cut, the wrinkling of the coat across the shoulders, and the series of wrinkles in the sleeves that advertised bulging biceps muscles.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0115">While he waved his hand and muttered that he had done nothing at all, he was obeying her behest by trying to get into a chair. </span>
      <span id="f0116"> He found time to admire the ease with which she sat down, then lurched toward a chair facing her, overwhelmed with consciousness of the awkward figure he was cutting. </span>
      <span id="f0117"> This was a new experience for him. </span>
      <span id="f0118"> All his life, up to then, he had been unaware of being either graceful or awkward. </span>
      <span id="f0119"> Such thoughts of self had never entered his mind. </span>
      <span id="f0120"> He sat down gingerly on the edge of the chair, greatly worried by his hands. </span>
      <span id="f0121"> They were in the way wherever he put them. </span>
      <span id="f0122"> Arthur was leaving the room, and Martin Eden followed his exit with longing eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0123"> He felt lost, alone there in the room with that pale spirit of a woman. </span>
      <span id="f0124"> There was no bar-keeper upon whom to call for drinks, no small boy to send around the corner for a can of beer and by means of that social fluid start the amenities of friendship flowing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0125">&#34;You have such a scar on your neck, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0126">Eden,&#34; the girl was saying. </span>
      <span id="f0127"> &#34;How did it happen? </span>
      <span id="f0128"> I am sure it must have been some adventure.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0129">&#34;A Mexican with a knife, miss,&#34; he answered, moistening his parched lips and clearing his throat. </span>
      <span id="f0130"> &#34;It was just a fight. </span>
      <span id="f0131"> After I got the knife away, he tried to bite off my nose.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0132">Baldly as he had stated it, in his eyes was a rich vision of that hot, starry night at Salina Cruz, the white strip of beach, the lights of the sugar steamers in the harbor, the voices of the drunken sailors in the distance, the jostling stevedores, the flaming passion in the Mexican&#39;s face, the glint of the beast-eyes in the starlight, the sting of the steel in his neck, and the rush of blood, the crowd and the cries, the two bodies, his and the Mexican&#39;s, locked together, rolling over and over and tearing up the sand, and from away off somewhere the mellow tinkling of a guitar. </span>
      <span id="f0133"> Such was the picture, and he thrilled to the memory of it, wondering if the man could paint it who had painted the pilot-schooner on the wall. </span>
      <span id="f0134"> The white beach, the stars, and the lights of the sugar steamers would look great, he thought, and midway on the sand the dark group of figures that surrounded the fighters. </span>
      <span id="f0135"> The knife occupied a place in the picture, he decided, and would show well, with a sort of gleam, in the light of the stars. </span>
      <span id="f0136"> But of all this no hint had crept into his speech. </span>
      <span id="f0137"> &#34;He tried to bite off my nose,&#34; he concluded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0138">&#34;Oh,&#34; the girl said, in a faint, far voice, and he noticed the shock in her sensitive face.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0139">He felt a shock himself, and a blush of embarrassment shone faintly on his sunburned cheeks, though to him it burned as hotly as when his cheeks had been exposed to the open furnace-door in the fire-room. </span>
      <span id="f0140"> Such sordid things as stabbing affrays were evidently not fit subjects for conversation with a lady. </span>
      <span id="f0141"> People in the books, in her walk of life, did not talk about such things--perhaps they did not know about them, either.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0142">There was a brief pause in the conversation they were trying to get started. </span>
      <span id="f0143"> Then she asked tentatively about the scar on his cheek. </span>
      <span id="f0144"> Even as she asked, he realized that she was making an effort to talk his talk, and he resolved to get away from it and talk hers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0145">&#34;It was just an accident,&#34; he said, putting his hand to his cheek. </span>
      <span id="f0146"> &#34;One night, in a calm, with a heavy sea running, the main-boom-lift carried away, an&#39; next the tackle. </span>
      <span id="f0147"> The lift was wire, an&#39; it was threshin&#39; around like a snake. </span>
      <span id="f0148"> The whole watch was tryin&#39; to grab it, an&#39; I rushed in an&#39; got swatted.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0149">&#34;Oh,&#34; she said, this time with an accent of comprehension, though secretly his speech had been so much Greek to her and she was wondering what a _lift_ was and what _swatted_ meant.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0150">&#34;This man Swineburne,&#34; he began, attempting to put his plan into execution and pronouncing the i long.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0151">&#34;Who?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0152">&#34;Swineburne,&#34; he repeated, with the same mispronunciation. </span>
      <span id="f0153"> &#34;The poet.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0154">&#34;Swinburne,&#34; she corrected.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0155">&#34;Yes, that&#39;s the chap,&#34; he stammered, his cheeks hot again. </span>
      <span id="f0156"> &#34;How long since he died?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0157">&#34;Why, I haven&#39;t heard that he was dead.&#34;  She looked at him curiously. </span>
      <span id="f0158">&#34;Where did you make his acquaintance?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0159">&#34;I never clapped eyes on him,&#34; was the reply. </span>
      <span id="f0160"> &#34;But I read some of his poetry out of that book there on the table just before you come in. </span>
      <span id="f0161"> How do you like his poetry?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0162">And thereat she began to talk quickly and easily upon the subject he had suggested. </span>
      <span id="f0163"> He felt better, and settled back slightly from the edge of the chair, holding tightly to its arms with his hands, as if it might get away from him and buck him to the floor. </span>
      <span id="f0164"> He had succeeded in making her talk her talk, and while she rattled on, he strove to follow her, marvelling at all the knowledge that was stowed away in that pretty head of hers, and drinking in the pale beauty of her face. </span>
      <span id="f0165"> Follow her he did, though bothered by unfamiliar words that fell glibly from her lips and by critical phrases and thought-processes that were foreign to his mind, but that nevertheless stimulated his mind and set it tingling. </span>
      <span id="f0166"> Here was intellectual life, he thought, and here was beauty, warm and wonderful as he had never dreamed it could be. </span>
      <span id="f0167"> He forgot himself and stared at her with hungry eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0168"> Here was something to live for, to win to, to fight for--ay, and die for. </span>
      <span id="f0169"> The books were true. </span>
      <span id="f0170"> There were such women in the world. </span>
      <span id="f0171"> She was one of them. </span>
      <span id="f0172"> She lent wings to his imagination, and great, luminous canvases spread themselves before him whereon loomed vague, gigantic figures of love and romance, and of heroic deeds for woman&#39;s sake--for a pale woman, a flower of gold. </span>
      <span id="f0173"> And through the swaying, palpitant vision, as through a fairy mirage, he stared at the real woman, sitting there and talking of literature and art. </span>
      <span id="f0174"> He listened as well, but he stared, unconscious of the fixity of his gaze or of the fact that all that was essentially masculine in his nature was shining in his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0175"> But she, who knew little of the world of men, being a woman, was keenly aware of his burning eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0176"> She had never had men look at her in such fashion, and it embarrassed her. </span>
      <span id="f0177"> She stumbled and halted in her utterance. </span>
      <span id="f0178"> The thread of argument slipped from her. </span>
      <span id="f0179"> He frightened her, and at the same time it was strangely pleasant to be so looked upon. </span>
      <span id="f0180"> Her training warned her of peril and of wrong, subtle, mysterious, luring; while her instincts rang clarion-voiced through her being, impelling her to hurdle caste and place and gain to this traveller from another world, to this uncouth young fellow with lacerated hands and a line of raw red caused by the unaccustomed linen at his throat, who, all too evidently, was soiled and tainted by ungracious existence. </span>
      <span id="f0181"> She was clean, and her cleanness revolted; but she was woman, and she was just beginning to learn the paradox of woman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0182">&#34;As I was saying--what was I saying?&#34;  She broke off abruptly and laughed merrily at her predicament.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0183">&#34;You was saying that this man Swinburne failed bein&#39; a great poet because--an&#39; that was as far as you got, miss,&#34; he prompted, while to himself he seemed suddenly hungry, and delicious little thrills crawled up and down his spine at the sound of her laughter. </span>
      <span id="f0184"> Like silver, he thought to himself, like tinkling silver bells; and on the instant, and for an instant, he was transported to a far land, where under pink cherry blossoms, he smoked a cigarette and listened to the bells of the peaked pagoda calling straw-sandalled devotees to worship.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0185">&#34;Yes, thank you,&#34; she said. </span>
      <span id="f0186"> &#34;Swinburne fails, when all is said, because he is, well, indelicate. </span>
      <span id="f0187"> There are many of his poems that should never be read. </span>
      <span id="f0188"> Every line of the really great poets is filled with beautiful truth, and calls to all that is high and noble in the human. </span>
      <span id="f0189"> Not a line of the great poets can be spared without impoverishing the world by that much.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0190">&#34;I thought it was great,&#34; he said hesitatingly, &#34;the little I read. </span>
      <span id="f0191"> I had no idea he was such a--a scoundrel. </span>
      <span id="f0192"> I guess that crops out in his other books.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0193">&#34;There are many lines that could be spared from the book you were reading,&#34; she said, her voice primly firm and dogmatic.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0194">&#34;I must &#39;a&#39; missed &#39;em,&#34; he announced. </span>
      <span id="f0195"> &#34;What I read was the real goods. </span>
      <span id="f0196">It was all lighted up an&#39; shining, an&#39; it shun right into me an&#39; lighted me up inside, like the sun or a searchlight. </span>
      <span id="f0197"> That&#39;s the way it landed on me, but I guess I ain&#39;t up much on poetry, miss.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0198">He broke off lamely. </span>
      <span id="f0199"> He was confused, painfully conscious of his inarticulateness. </span>
      <span id="f0200"> He had felt the bigness and glow of life in what he had read, but his speech was inadequate. </span>
      <span id="f0201"> He could not express what he felt, and to himself he likened himself to a sailor, in a strange ship, on a dark night, groping about in the unfamiliar running rigging. </span>
      <span id="f0202"> Well, he decided, it was up to him to get acquainted in this new world. </span>
      <span id="f0203"> He had never seen anything that he couldn&#39;t get the hang of when he wanted to and it was about time for him to want to learn to talk the things that were inside of him so that she could understand. </span>
      <span id="f0204"> _She_ was bulking large on his horizon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0205">&#34;Now Longfellow--&#34; she was saying.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0206">&#34;Yes, I&#39;ve read &#39;m,&#34; he broke in impulsively, spurred on to exhibit and make the most of his little store of book knowledge, desirous of showing her that he was not wholly a stupid clod. </span>
      <span id="f0207"> &#34;&#39;The Psalm of Life,&#39; &#39;Excelsior,&#39; an&#39; . </span>
      <span id="f0208">. </span>
      <span id="f0209">. </span>
      <span id="f0210">I guess that&#39;s all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0211">She nodded her head and smiled, and he felt, somehow, that her smile was tolerant, pitifully tolerant. </span>
      <span id="f0212"> He was a fool to attempt to make a pretence that way. </span>
      <span id="f0213"> That Longfellow chap most likely had written countless books of poetry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0214">&#34;Excuse me, miss, for buttin&#39; in that way. </span>
      <span id="f0215"> I guess the real facts is that I don&#39;t know nothin&#39; much about such things. </span>
      <span id="f0216"> It ain&#39;t in my class. </span>
      <span id="f0217">But I&#39;m goin&#39; to make it in my class.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0218">It sounded like a threat. </span>
      <span id="f0219"> His voice was determined, his eyes were flashing, the lines of his face had grown harsh. </span>
      <span id="f0220"> And to her it seemed that the angle of his jaw had changed; its pitch had become unpleasantly aggressive. </span>
      <span id="f0221"> At the same time a wave of intense virility seemed to surge out from him and impinge upon her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0222">&#34;I think you could make it in--in your class,&#34; she finished with a laugh. </span>
      <span id="f0223">&#34;You are very strong.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0224">Her gaze rested for a moment on the muscular neck, heavy corded, almost bull-like, bronzed by the sun, spilling over with rugged health and strength. </span>
      <span id="f0225"> And though he sat there, blushing and humble, again she felt drawn to him. </span>
      <span id="f0226"> She was surprised by a wanton thought that rushed into her mind. </span>
      <span id="f0227"> It seemed to her that if she could lay her two hands upon that neck that all its strength and vigor would flow out to her. </span>
      <span id="f0228"> She was shocked by this thought. </span>
      <span id="f0229"> It seemed to reveal to her an undreamed depravity in her nature. </span>
      <span id="f0230"> Besides, strength to her was a gross and brutish thing. </span>
      <span id="f0231"> Her ideal of masculine beauty had always been slender gracefulness. </span>
      <span id="f0232"> Yet the thought still persisted. </span>
      <span id="f0233"> It bewildered her that she should desire to place her hands on that sunburned neck. </span>
      <span id="f0234"> In truth, she was far from robust, and the need of her body and mind was for strength. </span>
      <span id="f0235"> But she did not know it. </span>
      <span id="f0236"> She knew only that no man had ever affected her before as this one had, who shocked her from moment to moment with his awful grammar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0237">&#34;Yes, I ain&#39;t no invalid,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f0238"> &#34;When it comes down to hard-pan, I can digest scrap-iron. </span>
      <span id="f0239"> But just now I&#39;ve got dyspepsia. </span>
      <span id="f0240"> Most of what you was sayin&#39; I can&#39;t digest. </span>
      <span id="f0241"> Never trained that way, you see. </span>
      <span id="f0242"> I like books and poetry, and what time I&#39;ve had I&#39;ve read &#39;em, but I&#39;ve never thought about &#39;em the way you have. </span>
      <span id="f0243"> That&#39;s why I can&#39;t talk about &#39;em. </span>
      <span id="f0244">I&#39;m like a navigator adrift on a strange sea without chart or compass. </span>
      <span id="f0245">Now I want to get my bearin&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f0246"> Mebbe you can put me right. </span>
      <span id="f0247"> How did you learn all this you&#39;ve ben talkin&#39;?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0248">&#34;By going to school, I fancy, and by studying,&#34; she answered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0249">&#34;I went to school when I was a kid,&#34; he began to object.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0250">&#34;Yes; but I mean high school, and lectures, and the university.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0251">&#34;You&#39;ve gone to the university?&#34; he demanded in frank amazement. </span>
      <span id="f0252"> He felt that she had become remoter from him by at least a million miles.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0253">&#34;I&#39;m going there now. </span>
      <span id="f0254"> I&#39;m taking special courses in English.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0255">He did not know what &#34;English&#34; meant, but he made a mental note of that item of ignorance and passed on.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0256">&#34;How long would I have to study before I could go to the university?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0257">She beamed encouragement upon his desire for knowledge, and said: &#34;That depends upon how much studying you have already done. </span>
      <span id="f0258"> You have never attended high school? </span>
      <span id="f0259"> Of course not. </span>
      <span id="f0260"> But did you finish grammar school?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0261">&#34;I had two years to run, when I left,&#34; he answered. </span>
      <span id="f0262"> &#34;But I was always honorably promoted at school.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0263">The next moment, angry with himself for the boast, he had gripped the arms of the chair so savagely that every finger-end was stinging. </span>
      <span id="f0264"> At the same moment he became aware that a woman was entering the room. </span>
      <span id="f0265"> He saw the girl leave her chair and trip swiftly across the floor to the newcomer. </span>
      <span id="f0266"> They kissed each other, and, with arms around each other&#39;s waists, they advanced toward him. </span>
      <span id="f0267"> That must be her mother, he thought. </span>
      <span id="f0268">She was a tall, blond woman, slender, and stately, and beautiful. </span>
      <span id="f0269"> Her gown was what he might expect in such a house. </span>
      <span id="f0270"> His eyes delighted in the graceful lines of it. </span>
      <span id="f0271"> She and her dress together reminded him of women on the stage. </span>
      <span id="f0272"> Then he remembered seeing similar grand ladies and gowns entering the London theatres while he stood and watched and the policemen shoved him back into the drizzle beyond the awning. </span>
      <span id="f0273"> Next his mind leaped to the Grand Hotel at Yokohama, where, too, from the sidewalk, he had seen grand ladies. </span>
      <span id="f0274"> Then the city and the harbor of Yokohama, in a thousand pictures, began flashing before his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0275"> But he swiftly dismissed the kaleidoscope of memory, oppressed by the urgent need of the present. </span>
      <span id="f0276"> He knew that he must stand up to be introduced, and he struggled painfully to his feet, where he stood with trousers bagging at the knees, his arms loose-hanging and ludicrous, his face set hard for the impending ordeal.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>