<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER III</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0493">CHAPTER III</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0494">As Martin Eden went down the steps, his hand dropped into his coat pocket. </span>
      <span id="f0495"> It came out with a brown rice paper and a pinch of Mexican tobacco, which were deftly rolled together into a cigarette. </span>
      <span id="f0496"> He drew the first whiff of smoke deep into his lungs and expelled it in a long and lingering exhalation. </span>
      <span id="f0497"> &#34;By God!&#34; he said aloud, in a voice of awe and wonder. </span>
      <span id="f0498"> &#34;By God!&#34; he repeated. </span>
      <span id="f0499"> And yet again he murmured, &#34;By God!&#34; Then his hand went to his collar, which he ripped out of the shirt and stuffed into his pocket. </span>
      <span id="f0500"> A cold drizzle was falling, but he bared his head to it and unbuttoned his vest, swinging along in splendid unconcern. </span>
      <span id="f0501">He was only dimly aware that it was raining. </span>
      <span id="f0502"> He was in an ecstasy, dreaming dreams and reconstructing the scenes just past.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0503">He had met the woman at last--the woman that he had thought little about, not being given to thinking about women, but whom he had expected, in a remote way, he would sometime meet. </span>
      <span id="f0504"> He had sat next to her at table. </span>
      <span id="f0505"> He had felt her hand in his, he had looked into her eyes and caught a vision of a beautiful spirit;--but no more beautiful than the eyes through which it shone, nor than the flesh that gave it expression and form. </span>
      <span id="f0506"> He did not think of her flesh as flesh,--which was new to him; for of the women he had known that was the only way he thought. </span>
      <span id="f0507"> Her flesh was somehow different. </span>
      <span id="f0508"> He did not conceive of her body as a body, subject to the ills and frailties of bodies. </span>
      <span id="f0509"> Her body was more than the garb of her spirit. </span>
      <span id="f0510"> It was an emanation of her spirit, a pure and gracious crystallization of her divine essence. </span>
      <span id="f0511"> This feeling of the divine startled him. </span>
      <span id="f0512"> It shocked him from his dreams to sober thought. </span>
      <span id="f0513"> No word, no clew, no hint, of the divine had ever reached him before. </span>
      <span id="f0514"> He had never believed in the divine. </span>
      <span id="f0515"> He had always been irreligious, scoffing good-naturedly at the sky-pilots and their immortality of the soul. </span>
      <span id="f0516"> There was no life beyond, he had contended; it was here and now, then darkness everlasting. </span>
      <span id="f0517"> But what he had seen in her eyes was soul--immortal soul that could never die. </span>
      <span id="f0518"> No man he had known, nor any woman, had given him the message of immortality. </span>
      <span id="f0519"> But she had. </span>
      <span id="f0520"> She had whispered it to him the first moment she looked at him. </span>
      <span id="f0521"> Her face shimmered before his eyes as he walked along,--pale and serious, sweet and sensitive, smiling with pity and tenderness as only a spirit could smile, and pure as he had never dreamed purity could be. </span>
      <span id="f0522"> Her purity smote him like a blow. </span>
      <span id="f0523"> It startled him. </span>
      <span id="f0524"> He had known good and bad; but purity, as an attribute of existence, had never entered his mind. </span>
      <span id="f0525"> And now, in her, he conceived purity to be the superlative of goodness and of cleanness, the sum of which constituted eternal life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0526">And promptly urged his ambition to grasp at eternal life. </span>
      <span id="f0527"> He was not fit to carry water for her--he knew that; it was a miracle of luck and a fantastic stroke that had enabled him to see her and be with her and talk with her that night. </span>
      <span id="f0528"> It was accidental. </span>
      <span id="f0529"> There was no merit in it. </span>
      <span id="f0530"> He did not deserve such fortune. </span>
      <span id="f0531"> His mood was essentially religious. </span>
      <span id="f0532"> He was humble and meek, filled with self-disparagement and abasement. </span>
      <span id="f0533"> In such frame of mind sinners come to the penitent form. </span>
      <span id="f0534"> He was convicted of sin. </span>
      <span id="f0535"> But as the meek and lowly at the penitent form catch splendid glimpses of their future lordly existence, so did he catch similar glimpses of the state he would gain to by possessing her. </span>
      <span id="f0536"> But this possession of her was dim and nebulous and totally different from possession as he had known it. </span>
      <span id="f0537"> Ambition soared on mad wings, and he saw himself climbing the heights with her, sharing thoughts with her, pleasuring in beautiful and noble things with her. </span>
      <span id="f0538"> It was a soul-possession he dreamed, refined beyond any grossness, a free comradeship of spirit that he could not put into definite thought. </span>
      <span id="f0539"> He did not think it. </span>
      <span id="f0540"> For that matter, he did not think at all. </span>
      <span id="f0541"> Sensation usurped reason, and he was quivering and palpitant with emotions he had never known, drifting deliciously on a sea of sensibility where feeling itself was exalted and spiritualized and carried beyond the summits of life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0542">He staggered along like a drunken man, murmuring fervently aloud: &#34;By God! </span>
      <span id="f0543"> By God!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0544">A policeman on a street corner eyed him suspiciously, then noted his sailor roll.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0545">&#34;Where did you get it?&#34; the policeman demanded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0546">Martin Eden came back to earth. </span>
      <span id="f0547"> His was a fluid organism, swiftly adjustable, capable of flowing into and filling all sorts of nooks and crannies. </span>
      <span id="f0548"> With the policeman&#39;s hail he was immediately his ordinary self, grasping the situation clearly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0549">&#34;It&#39;s a beaut, ain&#39;t it?&#34; he laughed back. </span>
      <span id="f0550"> &#34;I didn&#39;t know I was talkin&#39; out loud.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0551">&#34;You&#39;ll be singing next,&#34; was the policeman&#39;s diagnosis.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0552">&#34;No, I won&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f0553"> Gimme a match an&#39; I&#39;ll catch the next car home.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0554">He lighted his cigarette, said good night, and went on. </span>
      <span id="f0555"> &#34;Now wouldn&#39;t that rattle you?&#34; he ejaculated under his breath. </span>
      <span id="f0556"> &#34;That copper thought I was drunk.&#34;  He smiled to himself and meditated. </span>
      <span id="f0557"> &#34;I guess I was,&#34; he added; &#34;but I didn&#39;t think a woman&#39;s face&#39;d do it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0558">He caught a Telegraph Avenue car that was going to Berkeley. </span>
      <span id="f0559"> It was crowded with youths and young men who were singing songs and ever and again barking out college yells. </span>
      <span id="f0560"> He studied them curiously. </span>
      <span id="f0561"> They were university boys. </span>
      <span id="f0562"> They went to the same university that she did, were in her class socially, could know her, could see her every day if they wanted to. </span>
      <span id="f0563"> He wondered that they did not want to, that they had been out having a good time instead of being with her that evening, talking with her, sitting around her in a worshipful and adoring circle. </span>
      <span id="f0564"> His thoughts wandered on. </span>
      <span id="f0565"> He noticed one with narrow-slitted eyes and a loose-lipped mouth. </span>
      <span id="f0566"> That fellow was vicious, he decided. </span>
      <span id="f0567"> On shipboard he would be a sneak, a whiner, a tattler. </span>
      <span id="f0568"> He, Martin Eden, was a better man than that fellow. </span>
      <span id="f0569"> The thought cheered him. </span>
      <span id="f0570"> It seemed to draw him nearer to Her. </span>
      <span id="f0571">He began comparing himself with the students. </span>
      <span id="f0572"> He grew conscious of the muscled mechanism of his body and felt confident that he was physically their master. </span>
      <span id="f0573"> But their heads were filled with knowledge that enabled them to talk her talk,--the thought depressed him. </span>
      <span id="f0574"> But what was a brain for? </span>
      <span id="f0575">he demanded passionately. </span>
      <span id="f0576"> What they had done, he could do. </span>
      <span id="f0577"> They had been studying about life from the books while he had been busy living life. </span>
      <span id="f0578"> His brain was just as full of knowledge as theirs, though it was a different kind of knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f0579"> How many of them could tie a lanyard knot, or take a wheel or a lookout? </span>
      <span id="f0580"> His life spread out before him in a series of pictures of danger and daring, hardship and toil. </span>
      <span id="f0581"> He remembered his failures and scrapes in the process of learning. </span>
      <span id="f0582"> He was that much to the good, anyway. </span>
      <span id="f0583"> Later on they would have to begin living life and going through the mill as he had gone. </span>
      <span id="f0584"> Very well. </span>
      <span id="f0585"> While they were busy with that, he could be learning the other side of life from the books.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0586">As the car crossed the zone of scattered dwellings that separated Oakland from Berkeley, he kept a lookout for a familiar, two-story building along the front of which ran the proud sign, HIGGINBOTHAM&#39;S CASH STORE. </span>
      <span id="f0587"> Martin Eden got off at this corner. </span>
      <span id="f0588"> He stared up for a moment at the sign. </span>
      <span id="f0589"> It carried a message to him beyond its mere wording. </span>
      <span id="f0590"> A personality of smallness and egotism and petty underhandedness seemed to emanate from the letters themselves. </span>
      <span id="f0591"> Bernard Higginbotham had married his sister, and he knew him well. </span>
      <span id="f0592"> He let himself in with a latch-key and climbed the stairs to the second floor. </span>
      <span id="f0593"> Here lived his brother-in-law. </span>
      <span id="f0594"> The grocery was below. </span>
      <span id="f0595"> There was a smell of stale vegetables in the air. </span>
      <span id="f0596"> As he groped his way across the hall he stumbled over a toy-cart, left there by one of his numerous nephews and nieces, and brought up against a door with a resounding bang. </span>
      <span id="f0597"> &#34;The pincher,&#34; was his thought; &#34;too miserly to burn two cents&#39; worth of gas and save his boarders&#39; necks.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0598">He fumbled for the knob and entered a lighted room, where sat his sister and Bernard Higginbotham. </span>
      <span id="f0599"> She was patching a pair of his trousers, while his lean body was distributed over two chairs, his feet dangling in dilapidated carpet-slippers over the edge of the second chair. </span>
      <span id="f0600"> He glanced across the top of the paper he was reading, showing a pair of dark, insincere, sharp-staring eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0601"> Martin Eden never looked at him without experiencing a sense of repulsion. </span>
      <span id="f0602"> What his sister had seen in the man was beyond him. </span>
      <span id="f0603"> The other affected him as so much vermin, and always aroused in him an impulse to crush him under his foot. </span>
      <span id="f0604"> &#34;Some day I&#39;ll beat the face off of him,&#34; was the way he often consoled himself for enduring the man&#39;s existence. </span>
      <span id="f0605"> The eyes, weasel-like and cruel, were looking at him complainingly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0606">&#34;Well,&#34; Martin demanded. </span>
      <span id="f0607"> &#34;Out with it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0608">&#34;I had that door painted only last week,&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0609">Higginbotham half whined, half bullied; &#34;and you know what union wages are. </span>
      <span id="f0610"> You should be more careful.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0611">Martin had intended to reply, but he was struck by the hopelessness of it. </span>
      <span id="f0612"> He gazed across the monstrous sordidness of soul to a chromo on the wall. </span>
      <span id="f0613"> It surprised him. </span>
      <span id="f0614"> He had always liked it, but it seemed that now he was seeing it for the first time. </span>
      <span id="f0615"> It was cheap, that was what it was, like everything else in this house. </span>
      <span id="f0616"> His mind went back to the house he had just left, and he saw, first, the paintings, and next, Her, looking at him with melting sweetness as she shook his hand at leaving. </span>
      <span id="f0617"> He forgot where he was and Bernard Higginbotham&#39;s existence, till that gentleman demanded:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0618">&#34;Seen a ghost?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0619">Martin came back and looked at the beady eyes, sneering, truculent, cowardly, and there leaped into his vision, as on a screen, the same eyes when their owner was making a sale in the store below--subservient eyes, smug, and oily, and flattering.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0620">&#34;Yes,&#34; Martin answered. </span>
      <span id="f0621"> &#34;I seen a ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0622"> Good night. </span>
      <span id="f0623"> Good night, Gertrude.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0624">He started to leave the room, tripping over a loose seam in the slatternly carpet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0625">&#34;Don&#39;t bang the door,&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0626">Higginbotham cautioned him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0627">He felt the blood crawl in his veins, but controlled himself and closed the door softly behind him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0628">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0629">Higginbotham looked at his wife exultantly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0630">&#34;He&#39;s ben drinkin&#39;,&#34; he proclaimed in a hoarse whisper. </span>
      <span id="f0631"> &#34;I told you he would.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0632">She nodded her head resignedly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0633">&#34;His eyes was pretty shiny,&#34; she confessed; &#34;and he didn&#39;t have no collar, though he went away with one. </span>
      <span id="f0634"> But mebbe he didn&#39;t have more&#39;n a couple of glasses.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0635">&#34;He couldn&#39;t stand up straight,&#34; asserted her husband. </span>
      <span id="f0636"> &#34;I watched him. </span>
      <span id="f0637">He couldn&#39;t walk across the floor without stumblin&#39;. </span>
      <span id="f0638"> You heard &#39;m yourself almost fall down in the hall.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0639">&#34;I think it was over Alice&#39;s cart,&#34; she said. </span>
      <span id="f0640"> &#34;He couldn&#39;t see it in the dark.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0641">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0642">Higginbotham&#39;s voice and wrath began to rise. </span>
      <span id="f0643"> All day he effaced himself in the store, reserving for the evening, with his family, the privilege of being himself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0644">&#34;I tell you that precious brother of yours was drunk.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0645">His voice was cold, sharp, and final, his lips stamping the enunciation of each word like the die of a machine. </span>
      <span id="f0646"> His wife sighed and remained silent. </span>
      <span id="f0647"> She was a large, stout woman, always dressed slatternly and always tired from the burdens of her flesh, her work, and her husband.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0648">&#34;He&#39;s got it in him, I tell you, from his father,&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0649">Higginbotham went on accusingly. </span>
      <span id="f0650"> &#34;An&#39; he&#39;ll croak in the gutter the same way. </span>
      <span id="f0651"> You know that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0652">She nodded, sighed, and went on stitching. </span>
      <span id="f0653"> They were agreed that Martin had come home drunk. </span>
      <span id="f0654"> They did not have it in their souls to know beauty, or they would have known that those shining eyes and that glowing face betokened youth&#39;s first vision of love.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0655">&#34;Settin&#39; a fine example to the children,&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0656">Higginbotham snorted, suddenly, in the silence for which his wife was responsible and which he resented. </span>
      <span id="f0657"> Sometimes he almost wished she would oppose him more. </span>
      <span id="f0658"> &#34;If he does it again, he&#39;s got to get out. </span>
      <span id="f0659"> Understand! </span>
      <span id="f0660"> I won&#39;t put up with his shinanigan--debotchin&#39; innocent children with his boozing.&#34;  Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0661">Higginbotham liked the word, which was a new one in his vocabulary, recently gleaned from a newspaper column. </span>
      <span id="f0662"> &#34;That&#39;s what it is, debotchin&#39;--there ain&#39;t no other name for it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0663">Still his wife sighed, shook her head sorrowfully, and stitched on. </span>
      <span id="f0664"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0665">Higginbotham resumed the newspaper.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0666">&#34;Has he paid last week&#39;s board?&#34; he shot across the top of the newspaper.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0667">She nodded, then added, &#34;He still has some money.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0668">&#34;When is he goin&#39; to sea again?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0669">&#34;When his pay-day&#39;s spent, I guess,&#34; she answered. </span>
      <span id="f0670"> &#34;He was over to San Francisco yesterday looking for a ship. </span>
      <span id="f0671"> But he&#39;s got money, yet, an&#39; he&#39;s particular about the kind of ship he signs for.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0672">&#34;It&#39;s not for a deck-swab like him to put on airs,&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0673">Higginbotham snorted. </span>
      <span id="f0674"> &#34;Particular! </span>
      <span id="f0675"> Him!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0676">&#34;He said something about a schooner that&#39;s gettin&#39; ready to go off to some outlandish place to look for buried treasure, that he&#39;d sail on her if his money held out.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0677">&#34;If he only wanted to steady down, I&#39;d give him a job drivin&#39; the wagon,&#34; her husband said, but with no trace of benevolence in his voice. </span>
      <span id="f0678"> &#34;Tom&#39;s quit.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0679">His wife looked alarm and interrogation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0680">&#34;Quit to-night. </span>
      <span id="f0681"> Is goin&#39; to work for Carruthers. </span>
      <span id="f0682"> They paid &#39;m more&#39;n I could afford.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0683">&#34;I told you you&#39;d lose &#39;m,&#34; she cried out. </span>
      <span id="f0684"> &#34;He was worth more&#39;n you was giving him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0685">&#34;Now look here, old woman,&#34; Higginbotham bullied, &#34;for the thousandth time I&#39;ve told you to keep your nose out of the business. </span>
      <span id="f0686"> I won&#39;t tell you again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0687">&#34;I don&#39;t care,&#34; she sniffled. </span>
      <span id="f0688"> &#34;Tom was a good boy.&#34;  Her husband glared at her. </span>
      <span id="f0689"> This was unqualified defiance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0690">&#34;If that brother of yours was worth his salt, he could take the wagon,&#34; he snorted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0691">&#34;He pays his board, just the same,&#34; was the retort. </span>
      <span id="f0692"> &#34;An&#39; he&#39;s my brother, an&#39; so long as he don&#39;t owe you money you&#39;ve got no right to be jumping on him all the time. </span>
      <span id="f0693"> I&#39;ve got some feelings, if I have been married to you for seven years.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0694">&#34;Did you tell &#39;m you&#39;d charge him for gas if he goes on readin&#39; in bed?&#34; he demanded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0695">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0696">Higginbotham made no reply. </span>
      <span id="f0697"> Her revolt faded away, her spirit wilting down into her tired flesh. </span>
      <span id="f0698"> Her husband was triumphant. </span>
      <span id="f0699"> He had her. </span>
      <span id="f0700"> His eyes snapped vindictively, while his ears joyed in the sniffles she emitted. </span>
      <span id="f0701"> He extracted great happiness from squelching her, and she squelched easily these days, though it had been different in the first years of their married life, before the brood of children and his incessant nagging had sapped her energy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0702">&#34;Well, you tell &#39;m to-morrow, that&#39;s all,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f0703"> &#34;An&#39; I just want to tell you, before I forget it, that you&#39;d better send for Marian to-morrow to take care of the children. </span>
      <span id="f0704"> With Tom quit, I&#39;ll have to be out on the wagon, an&#39; you can make up your mind to it to be down below waitin&#39; on the counter.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0705">&#34;But to-morrow&#39;s wash day,&#34; she objected weakly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0706">&#34;Get up early, then, an&#39; do it first. </span>
      <span id="f0707"> I won&#39;t start out till ten o&#39;clock.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0708">He crinkled the paper viciously and resumed his reading.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>