<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0709">CHAPTER IV</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0710">Martin Eden, with blood still crawling from contact with his brother-in- law, felt his way along the unlighted back hall and entered his room, a tiny cubbyhole with space for a bed, a wash-stand, and one chair. </span>
      <span id="f0711"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0712">Higginbotham was too thrifty to keep a servant when his wife could do the work. </span>
      <span id="f0713"> Besides, the servant&#39;s room enabled them to take in two boarders instead of one. </span>
      <span id="f0714"> Martin placed the Swinburne and Browning on the chair, took off his coat, and sat down on the bed. </span>
      <span id="f0715"> A screeching of asthmatic springs greeted the weight of his body, but he did not notice them. </span>
      <span id="f0716"> He started to take off his shoes, but fell to staring at the white plaster wall opposite him, broken by long streaks of dirty brown where rain had leaked through the roof. </span>
      <span id="f0717"> On this befouled background visions began to flow and burn. </span>
      <span id="f0718"> He forgot his shoes and stared long, till his lips began to move and he murmured, &#34;Ruth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0719">&#34;Ruth.&#34;  He had not thought a simple sound could be so beautiful. </span>
      <span id="f0720"> It delighted his ear, and he grew intoxicated with the repetition of it. </span>
      <span id="f0721">&#34;Ruth.&#34;  It was a talisman, a magic word to conjure with. </span>
      <span id="f0722"> Each time he murmured it, her face shimmered before him, suffusing the foul wall with a golden radiance. </span>
      <span id="f0723"> This radiance did not stop at the wall. </span>
      <span id="f0724"> It extended on into infinity, and through its golden depths his soul went questing after hers. </span>
      <span id="f0725"> The best that was in him was out in splendid flood. </span>
      <span id="f0726"> The very thought of her ennobled and purified him, made him better, and made him want to be better. </span>
      <span id="f0727"> This was new to him. </span>
      <span id="f0728"> He had never known women who had made him better. </span>
      <span id="f0729"> They had always had the counter effect of making him beastly. </span>
      <span id="f0730"> He did not know that many of them had done their best, bad as it was. </span>
      <span id="f0731"> Never having been conscious of himself, he did not know that he had that in his being that drew love from women and which had been the cause of their reaching out for his youth. </span>
      <span id="f0732"> Though they had often bothered him, he had never bothered about them; and he would never have dreamed that there were women who had been better because of him. </span>
      <span id="f0733">Always in sublime carelessness had he lived, till now, and now it seemed to him that they had always reached out and dragged at him with vile hands. </span>
      <span id="f0734"> This was not just to them, nor to himself. </span>
      <span id="f0735"> But he, who for the first time was becoming conscious of himself, was in no condition to judge, and he burned with shame as he stared at the vision of his infamy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0736">He got up abruptly and tried to see himself in the dirty looking-glass over the wash-stand. </span>
      <span id="f0737"> He passed a towel over it and looked again, long and carefully. </span>
      <span id="f0738"> It was the first time he had ever really seen himself. </span>
      <span id="f0739">His eyes were made for seeing, but up to that moment they had been filled with the ever changing panorama of the world, at which he had been too busy gazing, ever to gaze at himself. </span>
      <span id="f0740"> He saw the head and face of a young fellow of twenty, but, being unused to such appraisement, he did not know how to value it. </span>
      <span id="f0741"> Above a square-domed forehead he saw a mop of brown hair, nut-brown, with a wave to it and hints of curls that were a delight to any woman, making hands tingle to stroke it and fingers tingle to pass caresses through it. </span>
      <span id="f0742"> But he passed it by as without merit, in Her eyes, and dwelt long and thoughtfully on the high, square forehead,--striving to penetrate it and learn the quality of its content. </span>
      <span id="f0743">What kind of a brain lay behind there? </span>
      <span id="f0744">was his insistent interrogation. </span>
      <span id="f0745">What was it capable of? </span>
      <span id="f0746"> How far would it take him? </span>
      <span id="f0747"> Would it take him to her?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0748">He wondered if there was soul in those steel-gray eyes that were often quite blue of color and that were strong with the briny airs of the sun- washed deep. </span>
      <span id="f0749"> He wondered, also, how his eyes looked to her. </span>
      <span id="f0750"> He tried to imagine himself she, gazing into those eyes of his, but failed in the jugglery. </span>
      <span id="f0751"> He could successfully put himself inside other men&#39;s minds, but they had to be men whose ways of life he knew. </span>
      <span id="f0752"> He did not know her way of life. </span>
      <span id="f0753"> She was wonder and mystery, and how could he guess one thought of hers? </span>
      <span id="f0754"> Well, they were honest eyes, he concluded, and in them was neither smallness nor meanness. </span>
      <span id="f0755"> The brown sunburn of his face surprised him. </span>
      <span id="f0756"> He had not dreamed he was so black. </span>
      <span id="f0757"> He rolled up his shirt-sleeve and compared the white underside if the arm with his face. </span>
      <span id="f0758">Yes, he was a white man, after all. </span>
      <span id="f0759"> But the arms were sunburned, too. </span>
      <span id="f0760"> He twisted his arm, rolled the biceps over with his other hand, and gazed underneath where he was least touched by the sun. </span>
      <span id="f0761"> It was very white. </span>
      <span id="f0762"> He laughed at his bronzed face in the glass at the thought that it was once as white as the underside of his arm; nor did he dream that in the world there were few pale spirits of women who could boast fairer or smoother skins than he--fairer than where he had escaped the ravages of the sun.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0763">His might have been a cherub&#39;s mouth, had not the full, sensuous lips a trick, under stress, of drawing firmly across the teeth. </span>
      <span id="f0764"> At times, so tightly did they draw, the mouth became stern and harsh, even ascetic. </span>
      <span id="f0765">They were the lips of a fighter and of a lover. </span>
      <span id="f0766"> They could taste the sweetness of life with relish, and they could put the sweetness aside and command life. </span>
      <span id="f0767"> The chin and jaw, strong and just hinting of square aggressiveness, helped the lips to command life. </span>
      <span id="f0768"> Strength balanced sensuousness and had upon it a tonic effect, compelling him to love beauty that was healthy and making him vibrate to sensations that were wholesome. </span>
      <span id="f0769"> And between the lips were teeth that had never known nor needed the dentist&#39;s care. </span>
      <span id="f0770"> They were white and strong and regular, he decided, as he looked at them. </span>
      <span id="f0771"> But as he looked, he began to be troubled. </span>
      <span id="f0772"> Somewhere, stored away in the recesses of his mind and vaguely remembered, was the impression that there were people who washed their teeth every day. </span>
      <span id="f0773"> They were the people from up above--people in her class. </span>
      <span id="f0774"> She must wash her teeth every day, too. </span>
      <span id="f0775"> What would she think if she learned that he had never washed his teeth in all the days of his life? </span>
      <span id="f0776"> He resolved to get a tooth-brush and form the habit. </span>
      <span id="f0777"> He would begin at once, to-morrow. </span>
      <span id="f0778"> It was not by mere achievement that he could hope to win to her. </span>
      <span id="f0779"> He must make a personal reform in all things, even to tooth-washing and neck-gear, though a starched collar affected him as a renunciation of freedom.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0780">He held up his hand, rubbing the ball of the thumb over the calloused palm and gazing at the dirt that was ingrained in the flesh itself and which no brush could scrub away. </span>
      <span id="f0781"> How different was her palm! </span>
      <span id="f0782"> He thrilled deliciously at the remembrance. </span>
      <span id="f0783"> Like a rose-petal, he thought; cool and soft as a snowflake. </span>
      <span id="f0784"> He had never thought that a mere woman&#39;s hand could be so sweetly soft. </span>
      <span id="f0785"> He caught himself imagining the wonder of a caress from such a hand, and flushed guiltily. </span>
      <span id="f0786"> It was too gross a thought for her. </span>
      <span id="f0787"> In ways it seemed to impugn her high spirituality. </span>
      <span id="f0788"> She was a pale, slender spirit, exalted far beyond the flesh; but nevertheless the softness of her palm persisted in his thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f0789"> He was used to the harsh callousness of factory girls and working women. </span>
      <span id="f0790"> Well he knew why their hands were rough; but this hand of hers . </span>
      <span id="f0791">. </span>
      <span id="f0792">. </span>
      <span id="f0793">It was soft because she had never used it to work with. </span>
      <span id="f0794"> The gulf yawned between her and him at the awesome thought of a person who did not have to work for a living. </span>
      <span id="f0795"> He suddenly saw the aristocracy of the people who did not labor. </span>
      <span id="f0796"> It towered before him on the wall, a figure in brass, arrogant and powerful. </span>
      <span id="f0797"> He had worked himself; his first memories seemed connected with work, and all his family had worked. </span>
      <span id="f0798"> There was Gertrude. </span>
      <span id="f0799"> When her hands were not hard from the endless housework, they were swollen and red like boiled beef, what of the washing. </span>
      <span id="f0800"> And there was his sister Marian. </span>
      <span id="f0801">She had worked in the cannery the preceding summer, and her slim, pretty hands were all scarred with the tomato-knives. </span>
      <span id="f0802"> Besides, the tips of two of her fingers had been left in the cutting machine at the paper-box factory the preceding winter. </span>
      <span id="f0803"> He remembered the hard palms of his mother as she lay in her coffin. </span>
      <span id="f0804"> And his father had worked to the last fading gasp; the horned growth on his hands must have been half an inch thick when he died. </span>
      <span id="f0805"> But Her hands were soft, and her mother&#39;s hands, and her brothers&#39;. </span>
      <span id="f0806"> This last came to him as a surprise; it was tremendously indicative of the highness of their caste, of the enormous distance that stretched between her and him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0807">He sat back on the bed with a bitter laugh, and finished taking off his shoes. </span>
      <span id="f0808"> He was a fool; he had been made drunken by a woman&#39;s face and by a woman&#39;s soft, white hands. </span>
      <span id="f0809"> And then, suddenly, before his eyes, on the foul plaster-wall appeared a vision. </span>
      <span id="f0810"> He stood in front of a gloomy tenement house. </span>
      <span id="f0811"> It was night-time, in the East End of London, and before him stood Margey, a little factory girl of fifteen. </span>
      <span id="f0812"> He had seen her home after the bean-feast. </span>
      <span id="f0813"> She lived in that gloomy tenement, a place not fit for swine. </span>
      <span id="f0814"> His hand was going out to hers as he said good night. </span>
      <span id="f0815"> She had put her lips up to be kissed, but he wasn&#39;t going to kiss her. </span>
      <span id="f0816">Somehow he was afraid of her. </span>
      <span id="f0817"> And then her hand closed on his and pressed feverishly. </span>
      <span id="f0818"> He felt her callouses grind and grate on his, and a great wave of pity welled over him. </span>
      <span id="f0819"> He saw her yearning, hungry eyes, and her ill-fed female form which had been rushed from childhood into a frightened and ferocious maturity; then he put his arms about her in large tolerance and stooped and kissed her on the lips. </span>
      <span id="f0820"> Her glad little cry rang in his ears, and he felt her clinging to him like a cat. </span>
      <span id="f0821"> Poor little starveling! </span>
      <span id="f0822"> He continued to stare at the vision of what had happened in the long ago. </span>
      <span id="f0823"> His flesh was crawling as it had crawled that night when she clung to him, and his heart was warm with pity. </span>
      <span id="f0824"> It was a gray scene, greasy gray, and the rain drizzled greasily on the pavement stones. </span>
      <span id="f0825"> And then a radiant glory shone on the wall, and up through the other vision, displacing it, glimmered Her pale face under its crown of golden hair, remote and inaccessible as a star.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0826">He took the Browning and the Swinburne from the chair and kissed them. </span>
      <span id="f0827">Just the same, she told me to call again, he thought. </span>
      <span id="f0828"> He took another look at himself in the glass, and said aloud, with great solemnity:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0829">&#34;Martin Eden, the first thing to-morrow you go to the free library an&#39; read up on etiquette. </span>
      <span id="f0830"> Understand!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0831">He turned off the gas, and the springs shrieked under his body.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0832">&#34;But you&#39;ve got to quit cussin&#39;, Martin, old boy; you&#39;ve got to quit cussin&#39;,&#34; he said aloud.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0833">Then he dozed off to sleep and to dream dreams that for madness and audacity rivalled those of poppy-eaters.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>