<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER V</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0834">CHAPTER V</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0835">He awoke next morning from rosy scenes of dream to a steamy atmosphere that smelled of soapsuds and dirty clothes, and that was vibrant with the jar and jangle of tormented life. </span>
      <span id="f0836"> As he came out of his room he heard the slosh of water, a sharp exclamation, and a resounding smack as his sister visited her irritation upon one of her numerous progeny. </span>
      <span id="f0837"> The squall of the child went through him like a knife. </span>
      <span id="f0838"> He was aware that the whole thing, the very air he breathed, was repulsive and mean. </span>
      <span id="f0839"> How different, he thought, from the atmosphere of beauty and repose of the house wherein Ruth dwelt. </span>
      <span id="f0840"> There it was all spiritual. </span>
      <span id="f0841"> Here it was all material, and meanly material.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0842">&#34;Come here, Alfred,&#34; he called to the crying child, at the same time thrusting his hand into his trousers pocket, where he carried his money loose in the same large way that he lived life in general. </span>
      <span id="f0843"> He put a quarter in the youngster&#39;s hand and held him in his arms a moment, soothing his sobs. </span>
      <span id="f0844"> &#34;Now run along and get some candy, and don&#39;t forget to give some to your brothers and sisters. </span>
      <span id="f0845"> Be sure and get the kind that lasts longest.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0846">His sister lifted a flushed face from the wash-tub and looked at him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0847">&#34;A nickel&#39;d ha&#39; ben enough,&#34; she said. </span>
      <span id="f0848"> &#34;It&#39;s just like you, no idea of the value of money. </span>
      <span id="f0849"> The child&#39;ll eat himself sick.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0850">&#34;That&#39;s all right, sis,&#34; he answered jovially. </span>
      <span id="f0851"> &#34;My money&#39;ll take care of itself. </span>
      <span id="f0852"> If you weren&#39;t so busy, I&#39;d kiss you good morning.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0853">He wanted to be affectionate to this sister, who was good, and who, in her way, he knew, loved him. </span>
      <span id="f0854"> But, somehow, she grew less herself as the years went by, and more and more baffling. </span>
      <span id="f0855"> It was the hard work, the many children, and the nagging of her husband, he decided, that had changed her. </span>
      <span id="f0856"> It came to him, in a flash of fancy, that her nature seemed taking on the attributes of stale vegetables, smelly soapsuds, and of the greasy dimes, nickels, and quarters she took in over the counter of the store.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0857">&#34;Go along an&#39; get your breakfast,&#34; she said roughly, though secretly pleased. </span>
      <span id="f0858"> Of all her wandering brood of brothers he had always been her favorite. </span>
      <span id="f0859"> &#34;I declare I _will_ kiss you,&#34; she said, with a sudden stir at her heart.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0860">With thumb and forefinger she swept the dripping suds first from one arm and then from the other. </span>
      <span id="f0861"> He put his arms round her massive waist and kissed her wet steamy lips. </span>
      <span id="f0862">The tears welled into her eyes--not so much from strength of feeling as from the weakness of chronic overwork. </span>
      <span id="f0863"> She shoved him away from her, but not before he caught a glimpse of her moist eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0864">&#34;You&#39;ll find breakfast in the oven,&#34; she said hurriedly. </span>
      <span id="f0865"> &#34;Jim ought to be up now. </span>
      <span id="f0866"> I had to get up early for the washing. </span>
      <span id="f0867"> Now get along with you and get out of the house early. </span>
      <span id="f0868"> It won&#39;t be nice to-day, what of Tom quittin&#39; an&#39; nobody but Bernard to drive the wagon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0869">Martin went into the kitchen with a sinking heart, the image of her red face and slatternly form eating its way like acid into his brain. </span>
      <span id="f0870"> She might love him if she only had some time, he concluded. </span>
      <span id="f0871"> But she was worked to death. </span>
      <span id="f0872"> Bernard Higginbotham was a brute to work her so hard. </span>
      <span id="f0873">But he could not help but feel, on the other hand, that there had not been anything beautiful in that kiss. </span>
      <span id="f0874"> It was true, it was an unusual kiss. </span>
      <span id="f0875"> For years she had kissed him only when he returned from voyages or departed on voyages. </span>
      <span id="f0876">But this kiss had tasted soapsuds, and the lips, he had noticed, were flabby. </span>
      <span id="f0877"> There had been no quick, vigorous lip-pressure such as should accompany any kiss. </span>
      <span id="f0878"> Hers was the kiss of a tired woman who had been tired so long that she had forgotten how to kiss. </span>
      <span id="f0879"> He remembered her as a girl, before her marriage, when she would dance with the best, all night, after a hard day&#39;s work at the laundry, and think nothing of leaving the dance to go to another day&#39;s hard work. </span>
      <span id="f0880"> And then he thought of Ruth and the cool sweetness that must reside in her lips as it resided in all about her. </span>
      <span id="f0881"> Her kiss would be like her hand-shake or the way she looked at one, firm and frank. </span>
      <span id="f0882"> In imagination he dared to think of her lips on his, and so vividly did he imagine that he went dizzy at the thought and seemed to rift through clouds of rose-petals, filling his brain with their perfume.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0883">In the kitchen he found Jim, the other boarder, eating mush very languidly, with a sick, far-away look in his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0884"> Jim was a plumber&#39;s apprentice whose weak chin and hedonistic temperament, coupled with a certain nervous stupidity, promised to take him nowhere in the race for bread and butter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0885">&#34;Why don&#39;t you eat?&#34; he demanded, as Martin dipped dolefully into the cold, half-cooked oatmeal mush. </span>
      <span id="f0886"> &#34;Was you drunk again last night?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0887">Martin shook his head. </span>
      <span id="f0888"> He was oppressed by the utter squalidness of it all. </span>
      <span id="f0889"> Ruth Morse seemed farther removed than ever.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0890">&#34;I was,&#34; Jim went on with a boastful, nervous giggle. </span>
      <span id="f0891"> &#34;I was loaded right to the neck. </span>
      <span id="f0892"> Oh, she was a daisy. </span>
      <span id="f0893"> Billy brought me home.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0894">Martin nodded that he heard,--it was a habit of nature with him to pay heed to whoever talked to him,--and poured a cup of lukewarm coffee.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0895">&#34;Goin&#39; to the Lotus Club dance to-night?&#34; Jim demanded. </span>
      <span id="f0896"> &#34;They&#39;re goin&#39; to have beer, an&#39; if that Temescal bunch comes, there&#39;ll be a rough-house. </span>
      <span id="f0897"> I don&#39;t care, though. </span>
      <span id="f0898"> I&#39;m takin&#39; my lady friend just the same. </span>
      <span id="f0899"> Cripes, but I&#39;ve got a taste in my mouth!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0900">He made a wry face and attempted to wash the taste away with coffee.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0901">&#34;D&#39;ye know Julia?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0902">Martin shook his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0903">&#34;She&#39;s my lady friend,&#34; Jim explained, &#34;and she&#39;s a peach. </span>
      <span id="f0904"> I&#39;d introduce you to her, only you&#39;d win her. </span>
      <span id="f0905"> I don&#39;t see what the girls see in you, honest I don&#39;t; but the way you win them away from the fellers is sickenin&#39;.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0906">&#34;I never got any away from you,&#34; Martin answered uninterestedly. </span>
      <span id="f0907"> The breakfast had to be got through somehow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0908">&#34;Yes, you did, too,&#34; the other asserted warmly. </span>
      <span id="f0909"> &#34;There was Maggie.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0910">&#34;Never had anything to do with her. </span>
      <span id="f0911"> Never danced with her except that one night.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0912">&#34;Yes, an&#39; that&#39;s just what did it,&#34; Jim cried out. </span>
      <span id="f0913"> &#34;You just danced with her an&#39; looked at her, an&#39; it was all off. </span>
      <span id="f0914"> Of course you didn&#39;t mean nothin&#39; by it, but it settled me for keeps. </span>
      <span id="f0915"> Wouldn&#39;t look at me again. </span>
      <span id="f0916">Always askin&#39; about you. </span>
      <span id="f0917"> She&#39;d have made fast dates enough with you if you&#39;d wanted to.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0918">&#34;But I didn&#39;t want to.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0919">&#34;Wasn&#39;t necessary. </span>
      <span id="f0920"> I was left at the pole.&#34;  Jim looked at him admiringly. </span>
      <span id="f0921"> &#34;How d&#39;ye do it, anyway, Mart?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0922">&#34;By not carin&#39; about &#39;em,&#34; was the answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0923">&#34;You mean makin&#39; b&#39;lieve you don&#39;t care about them?&#34; Jim queried eagerly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0924">Martin considered for a moment, then answered, &#34;Perhaps that will do, but with me I guess it&#39;s different. </span>
      <span id="f0925"> I never have cared--much. </span>
      <span id="f0926"> If you can put it on, it&#39;s all right, most likely.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0927">&#34;You should &#39;a&#39; ben up at Riley&#39;s barn last night,&#34; Jim announced inconsequently. </span>
      <span id="f0928"> &#34;A lot of the fellers put on the gloves. </span>
      <span id="f0929"> There was a peach from West Oakland. </span>
      <span id="f0930"> They called &#39;m &#39;The Rat.&#39;  Slick as silk. </span>
      <span id="f0931"> No one could touch &#39;m. </span>
      <span id="f0932"> We was all wishin&#39; you was there. </span>
      <span id="f0933"> Where was you anyway?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0934">&#34;Down in Oakland,&#34; Martin replied.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0935">&#34;To the show?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0936">Martin shoved his plate away and got up.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0937">&#34;Comin&#39; to the dance to-night?&#34; the other called after him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0938">&#34;No, I think not,&#34; he answered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0939">He went downstairs and out into the street, breathing great breaths of air. </span>
      <span id="f0940"> He had been suffocating in that atmosphere, while the apprentice&#39;s chatter had driven him frantic. </span>
      <span id="f0941"> There had been times when it was all he could do to refrain from reaching over and mopping Jim&#39;s face in the mush- plate. </span>
      <span id="f0942"> The more he had chattered, the more remote had Ruth seemed to him. </span>
      <span id="f0943"> How could he, herding with such cattle, ever become worthy of her? </span>
      <span id="f0944">He was appalled at the problem confronting him, weighted down by the incubus of his working-class station. </span>
      <span id="f0945"> Everything reached out to hold him down--his sister, his sister&#39;s house and family, Jim the apprentice, everybody he knew, every tie of life. </span>
      <span id="f0946"> Existence did not taste good in his mouth. </span>
      <span id="f0947"> Up to then he had accepted existence, as he had lived it with all about him, as a good thing. </span>
      <span id="f0948"> He had never questioned it, except when he read books; but then, they were only books, fairy stories of a fairer and impossible world. </span>
      <span id="f0949"> But now he had seen that world, possible and real, with a flower of a woman called Ruth in the midmost centre of it; and thenceforth he must know bitter tastes, and longings sharp as pain, and hopelessness that tantalized because it fed on hope.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0950">He had debated between the Berkeley Free Library and the Oakland Free Library, and decided upon the latter because Ruth lived in Oakland. </span>
      <span id="f0951"> Who could tell?--a library was a most likely place for her, and he might see her there. </span>
      <span id="f0952"> He did not know the way of libraries, and he wandered through endless rows of fiction, till the delicate-featured French-looking girl who seemed in charge, told him that the reference department was upstairs. </span>
      <span id="f0953"> He did not know enough to ask the man at the desk, and began his adventures in the philosophy alcove. </span>
      <span id="f0954"> He had heard of book philosophy, but had not imagined there had been so much written about it. </span>
      <span id="f0955">The high, bulging shelves of heavy tomes humbled him and at the same time stimulated him. </span>
      <span id="f0956"> Here was work for the vigor of his brain. </span>
      <span id="f0957"> He found books on trigonometry in the mathematics section, and ran the pages, and stared at the meaningless formulas and figures. </span>
      <span id="f0958"> He could read English, but he saw there an alien speech. </span>
      <span id="f0959"> Norman and Arthur knew that speech. </span>
      <span id="f0960"> He had heard them talking it. </span>
      <span id="f0961"> And they were her brothers. </span>
      <span id="f0962"> He left the alcove in despair. </span>
      <span id="f0963"> From every side the books seemed to press upon him and crush him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0964">He had never dreamed that the fund of human knowledge bulked so big. </span>
      <span id="f0965"> He was frightened. </span>
      <span id="f0966"> How could his brain ever master it all? </span>
      <span id="f0967"> Later, he remembered that there were other men, many men, who had mastered it; and he breathed a great oath, passionately, under his breath, swearing that his brain could do what theirs had done.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0968">And so he wandered on, alternating between depression and elation as he stared at the shelves packed with wisdom. </span>
      <span id="f0969"> In one miscellaneous section he came upon a &#34;Norrie&#39;s Epitome.&#34;  He turned the pages reverently. </span>
      <span id="f0970"> In a way, it spoke a kindred speech. </span>
      <span id="f0971"> Both he and it were of the sea. </span>
      <span id="f0972"> Then he found a &#34;Bowditch&#34; and books by Lecky and Marshall. </span>
      <span id="f0973"> There it was; he would teach himself navigation. </span>
      <span id="f0974"> He would quit drinking, work up, and become a captain. </span>
      <span id="f0975"> Ruth seemed very near to him in that moment. </span>
      <span id="f0976"> As a captain, he could marry her (if she would have him). </span>
      <span id="f0977"> And if she wouldn&#39;t, well--he would live a good life among men, because of Her, and he would quit drinking anyway. </span>
      <span id="f0978"> Then he remembered the underwriters and the owners, the two masters a captain must serve, either of which could and would break him and whose interests were diametrically opposed. </span>
      <span id="f0979"> He cast his eyes about the room and closed the lids down on a vision of ten thousand books. </span>
      <span id="f0980"> No; no more of the sea for him. </span>
      <span id="f0981"> There was power in all that wealth of books, and if he would do great things, he must do them on the land. </span>
      <span id="f0982"> Besides, captains were not allowed to take their wives to sea with them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0983">Noon came, and afternoon. </span>
      <span id="f0984"> He forgot to eat, and sought on for the books on etiquette; for, in addition to career, his mind was vexed by a simple and very concrete problem: _When you meet a young lady and she asks you to call, how soon can you call_? </span>
      <span id="f0985">was the way he worded it to himself. </span>
      <span id="f0986"> But when he found the right shelf, he sought vainly for the answer. </span>
      <span id="f0987"> He was appalled at the vast edifice of etiquette, and lost himself in the mazes of visiting-card conduct between persons in polite society. </span>
      <span id="f0988"> He abandoned his search. </span>
      <span id="f0989"> He had not found what he wanted, though he had found that it would take all of a man&#39;s time to be polite, and that he would have to live a preliminary life in which to learn how to be polite.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0990">&#34;Did you find what you wanted?&#34; the man at the desk asked him as he was leaving.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0991">&#34;Yes, sir,&#34; he answered. </span>
      <span id="f0992"> &#34;You have a fine library here.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0993">The man nodded. </span>
      <span id="f0994"> &#34;We should be glad to see you here often. </span>
      <span id="f0995"> Are you a sailor?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0996">&#34;Yes, sir,&#34; he answered. </span>
      <span id="f0997"> &#34;And I&#39;ll come again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0998">Now, how did he know that? </span>
      <span id="f0999">he asked himself as he went down the stairs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1000">And for the first block along the street he walked very stiff and straight and awkwardly, until he forgot himself in his thoughts, whereupon his rolling gait gracefully returned to him.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>