<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1001">CHAPTER VI</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1002">A terrible restlessness that was akin to hunger afflicted Martin Eden. </span>
      <span id="f1003"> He was famished for a sight of the girl whose slender hands had gripped his life with a giant&#39;s grasp. </span>
      <span id="f1004"> He could not steel himself to call upon her. </span>
      <span id="f1005">He was afraid that he might call too soon, and so be guilty of an awful breach of that awful thing called etiquette. </span>
      <span id="f1006"> He spent long hours in the Oakland and Berkeley libraries, and made out application blanks for membership for himself, his sisters Gertrude and Marian, and Jim, the latter&#39;s consent being obtained at the expense of several glasses of beer. </span>
      <span id="f1007"> With four cards permitting him to draw books, he burned the gas late in the servant&#39;s room, and was charged fifty cents a week for it by Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1008">Higginbotham.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1009">The many books he read but served to whet his unrest. </span>
      <span id="f1010"> Every page of every book was a peep-hole into the realm of knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f1011"> His hunger fed upon what he read, and increased. </span>
      <span id="f1012"> Also, he did not know where to begin, and continually suffered from lack of preparation. </span>
      <span id="f1013"> The commonest references, that he could see plainly every reader was expected to know, he did not know. </span>
      <span id="f1014"> And the same was true of the poetry he read which maddened him with delight. </span>
      <span id="f1015"> He read more of Swinburne than was contained in the volume Ruth had lent him; and &#34;Dolores&#34; he understood thoroughly. </span>
      <span id="f1016">But surely Ruth did not understand it, he concluded. </span>
      <span id="f1017"> How could she, living the refined life she did? </span>
      <span id="f1018"> Then he chanced upon Kipling&#39;s poems, and was swept away by the lilt and swing and glamour with which familiar things had been invested. </span>
      <span id="f1019"> He was amazed at the man&#39;s sympathy with life and at his incisive psychology. </span>
      <span id="f1020"> Psychology was a new word in Martin&#39;s vocabulary. </span>
      <span id="f1021"> He had bought a dictionary, which deed had decreased his supply of money and brought nearer the day on which he must sail in search of more. </span>
      <span id="f1022"> Also, it incensed Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1023">Higginbotham, who would have preferred the money taking the form of board.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1024">He dared not go near Ruth&#39;s neighborhood in the daytime, but night found him lurking like a thief around the Morse home, stealing glimpses at the windows and loving the very walls that sheltered her. </span>
      <span id="f1025"> Several times he barely escaped being caught by her brothers, and once he trailed Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1026">Morse down town and studied his face in the lighted streets, longing all the while for some quick danger of death to threaten so that he might spring in and save her father. </span>
      <span id="f1027"> On another night, his vigil was rewarded by a glimpse of Ruth through a second-story window. </span>
      <span id="f1028"> He saw only her head and shoulders, and her arms raised as she fixed her hair before a mirror. </span>
      <span id="f1029">It was only for a moment, but it was a long moment to him, during which his blood turned to wine and sang through his veins. </span>
      <span id="f1030"> Then she pulled down the shade. </span>
      <span id="f1031"> But it was her room--he had learned that; and thereafter he strayed there often, hiding under a dark tree on the opposite side of the street and smoking countless cigarettes. </span>
      <span id="f1032"> One afternoon he saw her mother coming out of a bank, and received another proof of the enormous distance that separated Ruth from him. </span>
      <span id="f1033"> She was of the class that dealt with banks. </span>
      <span id="f1034"> He had never been inside a bank in his life, and he had an idea that such institutions were frequented only by the very rich and the very powerful.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1035">In one way, he had undergone a moral revolution. </span>
      <span id="f1036"> Her cleanness and purity had reacted upon him, and he felt in his being a crying need to be clean. </span>
      <span id="f1037"> He must be that if he were ever to be worthy of breathing the same air with her. </span>
      <span id="f1038"> He washed his teeth, and scrubbed his hands with a kitchen scrub-brush till he saw a nail-brush in a drug-store window and divined its use. </span>
      <span id="f1039"> While purchasing it, the clerk glanced at his nails, suggested a nail-file, and so he became possessed of an additional toilet- tool. </span>
      <span id="f1040"> He ran across a book in the library on the care of the body, and promptly developed a penchant for a cold-water bath every morning, much to the amazement of Jim, and to the bewilderment of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1041">Higginbotham, who was not in sympathy with such high-fangled notions and who seriously debated whether or not he should charge Martin extra for the water. </span>
      <span id="f1042">Another stride was in the direction of creased trousers. </span>
      <span id="f1043"> Now that Martin was aroused in such matters, he swiftly noted the difference between the baggy knees of the trousers worn by the working class and the straight line from knee to foot of those worn by the men above the working class. </span>
      <span id="f1044">Also, he learned the reason why, and invaded his sister&#39;s kitchen in search of irons and ironing-board. </span>
      <span id="f1045"> He had misadventures at first, hopelessly burning one pair and buying another, which expenditure again brought nearer the day on which he must put to sea.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1046">But the reform went deeper than mere outward appearance. </span>
      <span id="f1047"> He still smoked, but he drank no more. </span>
      <span id="f1048"> Up to that time, drinking had seemed to him the proper thing for men to do, and he had prided himself on his strong head which enabled him to drink most men under the table. </span>
      <span id="f1049"> Whenever he encountered a chance shipmate, and there were many in San Francisco, he treated them and was treated in turn, as of old, but he ordered for himself root beer or ginger ale and good-naturedly endured their chaffing. </span>
      <span id="f1050"> And as they waxed maudlin he studied them, watching the beast rise and master them and thanking God that he was no longer as they. </span>
      <span id="f1051"> They had their limitations to forget, and when they were drunk, their dim, stupid spirits were even as gods, and each ruled in his heaven of intoxicated desire. </span>
      <span id="f1052"> With Martin the need for strong drink had vanished. </span>
      <span id="f1053">He was drunken in new and more profound ways--with Ruth, who had fired him with love and with a glimpse of higher and eternal life; with books, that had set a myriad maggots of desire gnawing in his brain; and with the sense of personal cleanliness he was achieving, that gave him even more superb health than what he had enjoyed and that made his whole body sing with physical well-being.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1054">One night he went to the theatre, on the blind chance that he might see her there, and from the second balcony he did see her. </span>
      <span id="f1055"> He saw her come down the aisle, with Arthur and a strange young man with a football mop of hair and eyeglasses, the sight of whom spurred him to instant apprehension and jealousy. </span>
      <span id="f1056"> He saw her take her seat in the orchestra circle, and little else than her did he see that night--a pair of slender white shoulders and a mass of pale gold hair, dim with distance. </span>
      <span id="f1057"> But there were others who saw, and now and again, glancing at those about him, he noted two young girls who looked back from the row in front, a dozen seats along, and who smiled at him with bold eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1058"> He had always been easy-going. </span>
      <span id="f1059"> It was not in his nature to give rebuff. </span>
      <span id="f1060"> In the old days he would have smiled back, and gone further and encouraged smiling. </span>
      <span id="f1061">But now it was different. </span>
      <span id="f1062"> He did smile back, then looked away, and looked no more deliberately. </span>
      <span id="f1063"> But several times, forgetting the existence of the two girls, his eyes caught their smiles. </span>
      <span id="f1064"> He could not re-thumb himself in a day, nor could he violate the intrinsic kindliness of his nature; so, at such moments, he smiled at the girls in warm human friendliness. </span>
      <span id="f1065"> It was nothing new to him. </span>
      <span id="f1066"> He knew they were reaching out their woman&#39;s hands to him. </span>
      <span id="f1067"> But it was different now. </span>
      <span id="f1068"> Far down there in the orchestra circle was the one woman in all the world, so different, so terrifically different, from these two girls of his class, that he could feel for them only pity and sorrow. </span>
      <span id="f1069"> He had it in his heart to wish that they could possess, in some small measure, her goodness and glory. </span>
      <span id="f1070"> And not for the world could he hurt them because of their outreaching. </span>
      <span id="f1071"> He was not flattered by it; he even felt a slight shame at his lowliness that permitted it. </span>
      <span id="f1072"> He knew, did he belong in Ruth&#39;s class, that there would be no overtures from these girls; and with each glance of theirs he felt the fingers of his own class clutching at him to hold him down.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1073">He left his seat before the curtain went down on the last act, intent on seeing Her as she passed out. </span>
      <span id="f1074"> There were always numbers of men who stood on the sidewalk outside, and he could pull his cap down over his eyes and screen himself behind some one&#39;s shoulder so that she should not see him. </span>
      <span id="f1075">He emerged from the theatre with the first of the crowd; but scarcely had he taken his position on the edge of the sidewalk when the two girls appeared. </span>
      <span id="f1076"> They were looking for him, he knew; and for the moment he could have cursed that in him which drew women. </span>
      <span id="f1077"> Their casual edging across the sidewalk to the curb, as they drew near, apprised him of discovery. </span>
      <span id="f1078"> They slowed down, and were in the thick of the crown as they came up with him. </span>
      <span id="f1079"> One of them brushed against him and apparently for the first time noticed him. </span>
      <span id="f1080"> She was a slender, dark girl, with black, defiant eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1081"> But they smiled at him, and he smiled back.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1082">&#34;Hello,&#34; he said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1083">It was automatic; he had said it so often before under similar circumstances of first meetings. </span>
      <span id="f1084"> Besides, he could do no less. </span>
      <span id="f1085"> There was that large tolerance and sympathy in his nature that would permit him to do no less. </span>
      <span id="f1086"> The black-eyed girl smiled gratification and greeting, and showed signs of stopping, while her companion, arm linked in arm, giggled and likewise showed signs of halting. </span>
      <span id="f1087"> He thought quickly. </span>
      <span id="f1088"> It would never do for Her to come out and see him talking there with them. </span>
      <span id="f1089">Quite naturally, as a matter of course, he swung in along-side the dark- eyed one and walked with her. </span>
      <span id="f1090"> There was no awkwardness on his part, no numb tongue. </span>
      <span id="f1091"> He was at home here, and he held his own royally in the badinage, bristling with slang and sharpness, that was always the preliminary to getting acquainted in these swift-moving affairs. </span>
      <span id="f1092"> At the corner where the main stream of people flowed onward, he started to edge out into the cross street. </span>
      <span id="f1093"> But the girl with the black eyes caught his arm, following him and dragging her companion after her, as she cried:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1094">&#34;Hold on, Bill! </span>
      <span id="f1095"> What&#39;s yer rush? </span>
      <span id="f1096"> You&#39;re not goin&#39; to shake us so sudden as all that?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1097">He halted with a laugh, and turned, facing them. </span>
      <span id="f1098"> Across their shoulders he could see the moving throng passing under the street lamps. </span>
      <span id="f1099"> Where he stood it was not so light, and, unseen, he would be able to see Her as she passed by. </span>
      <span id="f1100"> She would certainly pass by, for that way led home.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1101">&#34;What&#39;s her name?&#34; he asked of the giggling girl, nodding at the dark- eyed one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1102">&#34;You ask her,&#34; was the convulsed response.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1103">&#34;Well, what is it?&#34; he demanded, turning squarely on the girl in question.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1104">&#34;You ain&#39;t told me yours, yet,&#34; she retorted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1105">&#34;You never asked it,&#34; he smiled. </span>
      <span id="f1106"> &#34;Besides, you guessed the first rattle. </span>
      <span id="f1107">It&#39;s Bill, all right, all right.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1108">&#34;Aw, go &#39;long with you.&#34;  She looked him in the eyes, her own sharply passionate and inviting. </span>
      <span id="f1109"> &#34;What is it, honest?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1110">Again she looked. </span>
      <span id="f1111"> All the centuries of woman since sex began were eloquent in her eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1112"> And he measured her in a careless way, and knew, bold now, that she would begin to retreat, coyly and delicately, as he pursued, ever ready to reverse the game should he turn fainthearted. </span>
      <span id="f1113"> And, too, he was human, and could feel the draw of her, while his ego could not but appreciate the flattery of her kindness. </span>
      <span id="f1114"> Oh, he knew it all, and knew them well, from A to Z. </span>
      <span id="f1115"> Good, as goodness might be measured in their particular class, hard-working for meagre wages and scorning the sale of self for easier ways, nervously desirous for some small pinch of happiness in the desert of existence, and facing a future that was a gamble between the ugliness of unending toil and the black pit of more terrible wretchedness, the way whereto being briefer though better paid.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1116">&#34;Bill,&#34; he answered, nodding his head. </span>
      <span id="f1117"> &#34;Sure, Pete, Bill an&#39; no other.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1118">&#34;No joshin&#39;?&#34; she queried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1119">&#34;It ain&#39;t Bill at all,&#34; the other broke in.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1120">&#34;How do you know?&#34; he demanded. </span>
      <span id="f1121"> &#34;You never laid eyes on me before.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1122">&#34;No need to, to know you&#39;re lyin&#39;,&#34; was the retort.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1123">&#34;Straight, Bill, what is it?&#34; the first girl asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1124">&#34;Bill&#39;ll do,&#34; he confessed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1125">She reached out to his arm and shook him playfully. </span>
      <span id="f1126"> &#34;I knew you was lyin&#39;, but you look good to me just the same.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1127">He captured the hand that invited, and felt on the palm familiar markings and distortions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1128">&#34;When&#39;d you chuck the cannery?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1129">&#34;How&#39;d yeh know?&#34; and, &#34;My, ain&#39;t cheh a mind-reader!&#34; the girls chorussed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1130">And while he exchanged the stupidities of stupid minds with them, before his inner sight towered the book-shelves of the library, filled with the wisdom of the ages. </span>
      <span id="f1131"> He smiled bitterly at the incongruity of it, and was assailed by doubts. </span>
      <span id="f1132"> But between inner vision and outward pleasantry he found time to watch the theatre crowd streaming by. </span>
      <span id="f1133"> And then he saw Her, under the lights, between her brother and the strange young man with glasses, and his heart seemed to stand still. </span>
      <span id="f1134"> He had waited long for this moment. </span>
      <span id="f1135"> He had time to note the light, fluffy something that hid her queenly head, the tasteful lines of her wrapped figure, the gracefulness of her carriage and of the hand that caught up her skirts; and then she was gone and he was left staring at the two girls of the cannery, at their tawdry attempts at prettiness of dress, their tragic efforts to be clean and trim, the cheap cloth, the cheap ribbons, and the cheap rings on the fingers. </span>
      <span id="f1136"> He felt a tug at his arm, and heard a voice saying:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1137">&#34;Wake up, Bill! </span>
      <span id="f1138"> What&#39;s the matter with you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1139">&#34;What was you sayin&#39;?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1140">&#34;Oh, nothin&#39;,&#34; the dark girl answered, with a toss of her head. </span>
      <span id="f1141"> &#34;I was only remarkin&#39;--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1142">&#34;What?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1143">&#34;Well, I was whisperin&#39; it&#39;d be a good idea if you could dig up a gentleman friend--for her&#34; (indicating her companion), &#34;and then, we could go off an&#39; have ice-cream soda somewhere, or coffee, or anything.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1144">He was afflicted by a sudden spiritual nausea. </span>
      <span id="f1145"> The transition from Ruth to this had been too abrupt. </span>
      <span id="f1146"> Ranged side by side with the bold, defiant eyes of the girl before him, he saw Ruth&#39;s clear, luminous eyes, like a saint&#39;s, gazing at him out of unplumbed depths of purity. </span>
      <span id="f1147"> And, somehow, he felt within him a stir of power. </span>
      <span id="f1148"> He was better than this. </span>
      <span id="f1149"> Life meant more to him than it meant to these two girls whose thoughts did not go beyond ice-cream and a gentleman friend. </span>
      <span id="f1150"> He remembered that he had led always a secret life in his thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f1151"> These thoughts he had tried to share, but never had he found a woman capable of understanding--nor a man. </span>
      <span id="f1152"> He had tried, at times, but had only puzzled his listeners. </span>
      <span id="f1153"> And as his thoughts had been beyond them, so, he argued now, he must be beyond them. </span>
      <span id="f1154"> He felt power move in him, and clenched his fists. </span>
      <span id="f1155"> If life meant more to him, then it was for him to demand more from life, but he could not demand it from such companionship as this. </span>
      <span id="f1156"> Those bold black eyes had nothing to offer. </span>
      <span id="f1157"> He knew the thoughts behind them--of ice-cream and of something else. </span>
      <span id="f1158"> But those saint&#39;s eyes alongside--they offered all he knew and more than he could guess. </span>
      <span id="f1159"> They offered books and painting, beauty and repose, and all the fine elegance of higher existence. </span>
      <span id="f1160"> Behind those black eyes he knew every thought process. </span>
      <span id="f1161"> It was like clockwork. </span>
      <span id="f1162">He could watch every wheel go around. </span>
      <span id="f1163"> Their bid was low pleasure, narrow as the grave, that palled, and the grave was at the end of it. </span>
      <span id="f1164"> But the bid of the saint&#39;s eyes was mystery, and wonder unthinkable, and eternal life. </span>
      <span id="f1165"> He had caught glimpses of the soul in them, and glimpses of his own soul, too.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1166">&#34;There&#39;s only one thing wrong with the programme,&#34; he said aloud. </span>
      <span id="f1167"> &#34;I&#39;ve got a date already.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1168">The girl&#39;s eyes blazed her disappointment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1169">&#34;To sit up with a sick friend, I suppose?&#34; she sneered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1170">&#34;No, a real, honest date with--&#34; he faltered, &#34;with a girl.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1171">&#34;You&#39;re not stringin&#39; me?&#34; she asked earnestly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1172">He looked her in the eyes and answered: &#34;It&#39;s straight, all right. </span>
      <span id="f1173"> But why can&#39;t we meet some other time? </span>
      <span id="f1174"> You ain&#39;t told me your name yet. </span>
      <span id="f1175"> An&#39; where d&#39;ye live?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1176">&#34;Lizzie,&#34; she replied, softening toward him, her hand pressing his arm, while her body leaned against his. </span>
      <span id="f1177"> &#34;Lizzie Connolly. </span>
      <span id="f1178"> And I live at Fifth an&#39; Market.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1179">He talked on a few minutes before saying good night. </span>
      <span id="f1180"> He did not go home immediately; and under the tree where he kept his vigils he looked up at a window and murmured: &#34;That date was with you, Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f1181"> I kept it for you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>