<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER VII</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1182">CHAPTER VII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1183">A week of heavy reading had passed since the evening he first met Ruth Morse, and still he dared not call. </span>
      <span id="f1184"> Time and again he nerved himself up to call, but under the doubts that assailed him his determination died away. </span>
      <span id="f1185"> He did not know the proper time to call, nor was there any one to tell him, and he was afraid of committing himself to an irretrievable blunder. </span>
      <span id="f1186"> Having shaken himself free from his old companions and old ways of life, and having no new companions, nothing remained for him but to read, and the long hours he devoted to it would have ruined a dozen pairs of ordinary eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1187"> But his eyes were strong, and they were backed by a body superbly strong. </span>
      <span id="f1188"> Furthermore, his mind was fallow. </span>
      <span id="f1189"> It had lain fallow all his life so far as the abstract thought of the books was concerned, and it was ripe for the sowing. </span>
      <span id="f1190"> It had never been jaded by study, and it bit hold of the knowledge in the books with sharp teeth that would not let go.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1191">It seemed to him, by the end of the week, that he had lived centuries, so far behind were the old life and outlook. </span>
      <span id="f1192"> But he was baffled by lack of preparation. </span>
      <span id="f1193"> He attempted to read books that required years of preliminary specialization. </span>
      <span id="f1194"> One day he would read a book of antiquated philosophy, and the next day one that was ultra-modern, so that his head would be whirling with the conflict and contradiction of ideas. </span>
      <span id="f1195"> It was the same with the economists. </span>
      <span id="f1196"> On the one shelf at the library he found Karl Marx, Ricardo, Adam Smith, and Mill, and the abstruse formulas of the one gave no clew that the ideas of another were obsolete. </span>
      <span id="f1197"> He was bewildered, and yet he wanted to know. </span>
      <span id="f1198"> He had become interested, in a day, in economics, industry, and politics. </span>
      <span id="f1199"> Passing through the City Hall Park, he had noticed a group of men, in the centre of which were half a dozen, with flushed faces and raised voices, earnestly carrying on a discussion. </span>
      <span id="f1200"> He joined the listeners, and heard a new, alien tongue in the mouths of the philosophers of the people. </span>
      <span id="f1201"> One was a tramp, another was a labor agitator, a third was a law-school student, and the remainder was composed of wordy workingmen. </span>
      <span id="f1202"> For the first time he heard of socialism, anarchism, and single tax, and learned that there were warring social philosophies. </span>
      <span id="f1203"> He heard hundreds of technical words that were new to him, belonging to fields of thought that his meagre reading had never touched upon. </span>
      <span id="f1204"> Because of this he could not follow the arguments closely, and he could only guess at and surmise the ideas wrapped up in such strange expressions. </span>
      <span id="f1205"> Then there was a black-eyed restaurant waiter who was a theosophist, a union baker who was an agnostic, an old man who baffled all of them with the strange philosophy that _what is is right_, and another old man who discoursed interminably about the cosmos and the father-atom and the mother-atom.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1206">Martin Eden&#39;s head was in a state of addlement when he went away after several hours, and he hurried to the library to look up the definitions of a dozen unusual words. </span>
      <span id="f1207"> And when he left the library, he carried under his arm four volumes: Madam Blavatsky&#39;s &#34;Secret Doctrine,&#34; &#34;Progress and Poverty,&#34; &#34;The Quintessence of Socialism,&#34; and, &#34;Warfare of Religion and Science.&#34;  Unfortunately, he began on the &#34;Secret Doctrine.&#34;  Every line bristled with many-syllabled words he did not understand. </span>
      <span id="f1208"> He sat up in bed, and the dictionary was in front of him more often than the book. </span>
      <span id="f1209"> He looked up so many new words that when they recurred, he had forgotten their meaning and had to look them up again. </span>
      <span id="f1210"> He devised the plan of writing the definitions in a note-book, and filled page after page with them. </span>
      <span id="f1211"> And still he could not understand. </span>
      <span id="f1212"> He read until three in the morning, and his brain was in a turmoil, but not one essential thought in the text had he grasped. </span>
      <span id="f1213"> He looked up, and it seemed that the room was lifting, heeling, and plunging like a ship upon the sea. </span>
      <span id="f1214"> Then he hurled the &#34;Secret Doctrine&#34; and many curses across the room, turned off the gas, and composed himself to sleep. </span>
      <span id="f1215"> Nor did he have much better luck with the other three books. </span>
      <span id="f1216"> It was not that his brain was weak or incapable; it could think these thoughts were it not for lack of training in thinking and lack of the thought-tools with which to think. </span>
      <span id="f1217"> He guessed this, and for a while entertained the idea of reading nothing but the dictionary until he had mastered every word in it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1218">Poetry, however, was his solace, and he read much of it, finding his greatest joy in the simpler poets, who were more understandable. </span>
      <span id="f1219"> He loved beauty, and there he found beauty. </span>
      <span id="f1220"> Poetry, like music, stirred him profoundly, and, though he did not know it, he was preparing his mind for the heavier work that was to come. </span>
      <span id="f1221"> The pages of his mind were blank, and, without effort, much he read and liked, stanza by stanza, was impressed upon those pages, so that he was soon able to extract great joy from chanting aloud or under his breath the music and the beauty of the printed words he had read. </span>
      <span id="f1222"> Then he stumbled upon Gayley&#39;s &#34;Classic Myths&#34; and Bulfinch&#39;s &#34;Age of Fable,&#34; side by side on a library shelf. </span>
      <span id="f1223"> It was illumination, a great light in the darkness of his ignorance, and he read poetry more avidly than ever.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1224">The man at the desk in the library had seen Martin there so often that he had become quite cordial, always greeting him with a smile and a nod when he entered. </span>
      <span id="f1225"> It was because of this that Martin did a daring thing. </span>
      <span id="f1226">Drawing out some books at the desk, and while the man was stamping the cards, Martin blurted out:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1227">&#34;Say, there&#39;s something I&#39;d like to ask you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1228">The man smiled and paid attention.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1229">&#34;When you meet a young lady an&#39; she asks you to call, how soon can you call?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1230">Martin felt his shirt press and cling to his shoulders, what of the sweat of the effort.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1231">&#34;Why I&#39;d say any time,&#34; the man answered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1232">&#34;Yes, but this is different,&#34; Martin objected. </span>
      <span id="f1233"> &#34;She--I--well, you see, it&#39;s this way: maybe she won&#39;t be there. </span>
      <span id="f1234"> She goes to the university.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1235">&#34;Then call again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1236">&#34;What I said ain&#39;t what I meant,&#34; Martin confessed falteringly, while he made up his mind to throw himself wholly upon the other&#39;s mercy. </span>
      <span id="f1237"> &#34;I&#39;m just a rough sort of a fellow, an&#39; I ain&#39;t never seen anything of society. </span>
      <span id="f1238"> This girl is all that I ain&#39;t, an&#39; I ain&#39;t anything that she is. </span>
      <span id="f1239"> You don&#39;t think I&#39;m playin&#39; the fool, do you?&#34; he demanded abruptly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1240">&#34;No, no; not at all, I assure you,&#34; the other protested. </span>
      <span id="f1241"> &#34;Your request is not exactly in the scope of the reference department, but I shall be only too pleased to assist you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1242">Martin looked at him admiringly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1243">&#34;If I could tear it off that way, I&#39;d be all right,&#34; he said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1244">&#34;I beg pardon?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1245">&#34;I mean if I could talk easy that way, an&#39; polite, an&#39; all the rest.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1246">&#34;Oh,&#34; said the other, with comprehension.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1247">&#34;What is the best time to call? </span>
      <span id="f1248"> The afternoon?--not too close to meal- time? </span>
      <span id="f1249"> Or the evening? </span>
      <span id="f1250"> Or Sunday?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1251">&#34;I&#39;ll tell you,&#34; the librarian said with a brightening face. </span>
      <span id="f1252"> &#34;You call her up on the telephone and find out.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1253">&#34;I&#39;ll do it,&#34; he said, picking up his books and starting away.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1254">He turned back and asked:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1255">&#34;When you&#39;re speakin&#39; to a young lady--say, for instance, Miss Lizzie Smith--do you say &#39;Miss Lizzie&#39;? </span>
      <span id="f1256">or &#39;Miss Smith&#39;?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1257">&#34;Say &#39;Miss Smith,&#39;&#34; the librarian stated authoritatively. </span>
      <span id="f1258"> &#34;Say &#39;Miss Smith&#39; always--until you come to know her better.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1259">So it was that Martin Eden solved the problem.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1260">&#34;Come down any time; I&#39;ll be at home all afternoon,&#34; was Ruth&#39;s reply over the telephone to his stammered request as to when he could return the borrowed books.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1261">She met him at the door herself, and her woman&#39;s eyes took in immediately the creased trousers and the certain slight but indefinable change in him for the better. </span>
      <span id="f1262"> Also, she was struck by his face. </span>
      <span id="f1263"> It was almost violent, this health of his, and it seemed to rush out of him and at her in waves of force. </span>
      <span id="f1264"> She felt the urge again of the desire to lean toward him for warmth, and marvelled again at the effect his presence produced upon her. </span>
      <span id="f1265"> And he, in turn, knew again the swimming sensation of bliss when he felt the contact of her hand in greeting. </span>
      <span id="f1266"> The difference between them lay in that she was cool and self-possessed while his face flushed to the roots of the hair. </span>
      <span id="f1267"> He stumbled with his old awkwardness after her, and his shoulders swung and lurched perilously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1268">Once they were seated in the living-room, he began to get on easily--more easily by far than he had expected. </span>
      <span id="f1269"> She made it easy for him; and the gracious spirit with which she did it made him love her more madly than ever. </span>
      <span id="f1270"> They talked first of the borrowed books, of the Swinburne he was devoted to, and of the Browning he did not understand; and she led the conversation on from subject to subject, while she pondered the problem of how she could be of help to him. </span>
      <span id="f1271"> She had thought of this often since their first meeting. </span>
      <span id="f1272"> She wanted to help him. </span>
      <span id="f1273"> He made a call upon her pity and tenderness that no one had ever made before, and the pity was not so much derogatory of him as maternal in her. </span>
      <span id="f1274"> Her pity could not be of the common sort, when the man who drew it was so much man as to shock her with maidenly fears and set her mind and pulse thrilling with strange thoughts and feelings. </span>
      <span id="f1275"> The old fascination of his neck was there, and there was sweetness in the thought of laying her hands upon it. </span>
      <span id="f1276"> It seemed still a wanton impulse, but she had grown more used to it. </span>
      <span id="f1277"> She did not dream that in such guise new-born love would epitomize itself. </span>
      <span id="f1278">Nor did she dream that the feeling he excited in her was love. </span>
      <span id="f1279"> She thought she was merely interested in him as an unusual type possessing various potential excellencies, and she even felt philanthropic about it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1280">She did not know she desired him; but with him it was different. </span>
      <span id="f1281"> He knew that he loved her, and he desired her as he had never before desired anything in his life. </span>
      <span id="f1282"> He had loved poetry for beauty&#39;s sake; but since he met her the gates to the vast field of love-poetry had been opened wide. </span>
      <span id="f1283"> She had given him understanding even more than Bulfinch and Gayley. </span>
      <span id="f1284"> There was a line that a week before he would not have favored with a second thought--&#34;God&#39;s own mad lover dying on a kiss&#34;; but now it was ever insistent in his mind. </span>
      <span id="f1285"> He marvelled at the wonder of it and the truth; and as he gazed upon her he knew that he could die gladly upon a kiss. </span>
      <span id="f1286"> He felt himself God&#39;s own mad lover, and no accolade of knighthood could have given him greater pride. </span>
      <span id="f1287"> And at last he knew the meaning of life and why he had been born.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1288">As he gazed at her and listened, his thoughts grew daring. </span>
      <span id="f1289"> He reviewed all the wild delight of the pressure of her hand in his at the door, and longed for it again. </span>
      <span id="f1290"> His gaze wandered often toward her lips, and he yearned for them hungrily. </span>
      <span id="f1291"> But there was nothing gross or earthly about this yearning. </span>
      <span id="f1292"> It gave him exquisite delight to watch every movement and play of those lips as they enunciated the words she spoke; yet they were not ordinary lips such as all men and women had. </span>
      <span id="f1293"> Their substance was not mere human clay. </span>
      <span id="f1294"> They were lips of pure spirit, and his desire for them seemed absolutely different from the desire that had led him to other women&#39;s lips. </span>
      <span id="f1295"> He could kiss her lips, rest his own physical lips upon them, but it would be with the lofty and awful fervor with which one would kiss the robe of God. </span>
      <span id="f1296"> He was not conscious of this transvaluation of values that had taken place in him, and was unaware that the light that shone in his eyes when he looked at her was quite the same light that shines in all men&#39;s eyes when the desire of love is upon them. </span>
      <span id="f1297"> He did not dream how ardent and masculine his gaze was, nor that the warm flame of it was affecting the alchemy of her spirit. </span>
      <span id="f1298"> Her penetrative virginity exalted and disguised his own emotions, elevating his thoughts to a star-cool chastity, and he would have been startled to learn that there was that shining out of his eyes, like warm waves, that flowed through her and kindled a kindred warmth. </span>
      <span id="f1299"> She was subtly perturbed by it, and more than once, though she knew not why, it disrupted her train of thought with its delicious intrusion and compelled her to grope for the remainder of ideas partly uttered. </span>
      <span id="f1300"> Speech was always easy with her, and these interruptions would have puzzled her had she not decided that it was because he was a remarkable type. </span>
      <span id="f1301"> She was very sensitive to impressions, and it was not strange, after all, that this aura of a traveller from another world should so affect her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1302">The problem in the background of her consciousness was how to help him, and she turned the conversation in that direction; but it was Martin who came to the point first.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1303">&#34;I wonder if I can get some advice from you,&#34; he began, and received an acquiescence of willingness that made his heart bound. </span>
      <span id="f1304"> &#34;You remember the other time I was here I said I couldn&#39;t talk about books an&#39; things because I didn&#39;t know how? </span>
      <span id="f1305"> Well, I&#39;ve ben doin&#39; a lot of thinkin&#39; ever since. </span>
      <span id="f1306"> I&#39;ve ben to the library a whole lot, but most of the books I&#39;ve tackled have ben over my head. </span>
      <span id="f1307"> Mebbe I&#39;d better begin at the beginnin&#39;. </span>
      <span id="f1308">I ain&#39;t never had no advantages. </span>
      <span id="f1309"> I&#39;ve worked pretty hard ever since I was a kid, an&#39; since I&#39;ve ben to the library, lookin&#39; with new eyes at books--an&#39; lookin&#39; at new books, too--I&#39;ve just about concluded that I ain&#39;t ben reading the right kind. </span>
      <span id="f1310"> You know the books you find in cattle- camps an&#39; fo&#39;c&#39;s&#39;ls ain&#39;t the same you&#39;ve got in this house, for instance. </span>
      <span id="f1311"> Well, that&#39;s the sort of readin&#39; matter I&#39;ve ben accustomed to. </span>
      <span id="f1312"> And yet--an&#39; I ain&#39;t just makin&#39; a brag of it--I&#39;ve ben different from the people I&#39;ve herded with. </span>
      <span id="f1313"> Not that I&#39;m any better than the sailors an&#39; cow-punchers I travelled with,--I was cow-punchin&#39; for a short time, you know,--but I always liked books, read everything I could lay hands on, an&#39;--well, I guess I think differently from most of &#39;em.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1314">&#34;Now, to come to what I&#39;m drivin&#39; at. </span>
      <span id="f1315"> I was never inside a house like this. </span>
      <span id="f1316"> When I come a week ago, an&#39; saw all this, an&#39; you, an&#39; your mother, an&#39; brothers, an&#39; everything--well, I liked it. </span>
      <span id="f1317"> I&#39;d heard about such things an&#39; read about such things in some of the books, an&#39; when I looked around at your house, why, the books come true. </span>
      <span id="f1318"> But the thing I&#39;m after is I liked it. </span>
      <span id="f1319"> I wanted it. </span>
      <span id="f1320"> I want it now. </span>
      <span id="f1321"> I want to breathe air like you get in this house--air that is filled with books, and pictures, and beautiful things, where people talk in low voices an&#39; are clean, an&#39; their thoughts are clean. </span>
      <span id="f1322"> The air I always breathed was mixed up with grub an&#39; house-rent an&#39; scrappin&#39; an booze an&#39; that&#39;s all they talked about, too. </span>
      <span id="f1323"> Why, when you was crossin&#39; the room to kiss your mother, I thought it was the most beautiful thing I ever seen. </span>
      <span id="f1324"> I&#39;ve seen a whole lot of life, an&#39; somehow I&#39;ve seen a whole lot more of it than most of them that was with me. </span>
      <span id="f1325"> I like to see, an&#39; I want to see more, an&#39; I want to see it different.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1326">&#34;But I ain&#39;t got to the point yet. </span>
      <span id="f1327"> Here it is. </span>
      <span id="f1328"> I want to make my way to the kind of life you have in this house. </span>
      <span id="f1329"> There&#39;s more in life than booze, an&#39; hard work, an&#39; knockin&#39; about. </span>
      <span id="f1330"> Now, how am I goin&#39; to get it? </span>
      <span id="f1331">Where do I take hold an&#39; begin? </span>
      <span id="f1332"> I&#39;m willin&#39; to work my passage, you know, an&#39; I can make most men sick when it comes to hard work. </span>
      <span id="f1333"> Once I get started, I&#39;ll work night an&#39; day. </span>
      <span id="f1334"> Mebbe you think it&#39;s funny, me askin&#39; you about all this. </span>
      <span id="f1335"> I know you&#39;re the last person in the world I ought to ask, but I don&#39;t know anybody else I could ask--unless it&#39;s Arthur. </span>
      <span id="f1336"> Mebbe I ought to ask him. </span>
      <span id="f1337"> If I was--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1338">His voice died away. </span>
      <span id="f1339"> His firmly planned intention had come to a halt on the verge of the horrible probability that he should have asked Arthur and that he had made a fool of himself. </span>
      <span id="f1340"> Ruth did not speak immediately. </span>
      <span id="f1341">She was too absorbed in striving to reconcile the stumbling, uncouth speech and its simplicity of thought with what she saw in his face. </span>
      <span id="f1342"> She had never looked in eyes that expressed greater power. </span>
      <span id="f1343"> Here was a man who could do anything, was the message she read there, and it accorded ill with the weakness of his spoken thought. </span>
      <span id="f1344"> And for that matter so complex and quick was her own mind that she did not have a just appreciation of simplicity. </span>
      <span id="f1345"> And yet she had caught an impression of power in the very groping of this mind. </span>
      <span id="f1346"> It had seemed to her like a giant writhing and straining at the bonds that held him down. </span>
      <span id="f1347"> Her face was all sympathy when she did speak.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1348">&#34;What you need, you realize yourself, and it is education. </span>
      <span id="f1349"> You should go back and finish grammar school, and then go through to high school and university.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1350">&#34;But that takes money,&#34; he interrupted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1351">&#34;Oh!&#34; she cried. </span>
      <span id="f1352"> &#34;I had not thought of that. </span>
      <span id="f1353"> But then you have relatives, somebody who could assist you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1354">He shook his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1355">&#34;My father and mother are dead. </span>
      <span id="f1356"> I&#39;ve two sisters, one married, an&#39; the other&#39;ll get married soon, I suppose. </span>
      <span id="f1357"> Then I&#39;ve a string of brothers,--I&#39;m the youngest,--but they never helped nobody. </span>
      <span id="f1358"> They&#39;ve just knocked around over the world, lookin&#39; out for number one. </span>
      <span id="f1359"> The oldest died in India. </span>
      <span id="f1360"> Two are in South Africa now, an&#39; another&#39;s on a whaling voyage, an&#39; one&#39;s travellin&#39; with a circus--he does trapeze work. </span>
      <span id="f1361"> An&#39; I guess I&#39;m just like them. </span>
      <span id="f1362"> I&#39;ve taken care of myself since I was eleven--that&#39;s when my mother died. </span>
      <span id="f1363"> I&#39;ve got to study by myself, I guess, an&#39; what I want to know is where to begin.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1364">&#34;I should say the first thing of all would be to get a grammar. </span>
      <span id="f1365"> Your grammar is--&#34;  She had intended saying &#34;awful,&#34; but she amended it to &#34;is not particularly good.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1366">He flushed and sweated.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1367">&#34;I know I must talk a lot of slang an&#39; words you don&#39;t understand. </span>
      <span id="f1368"> But then they&#39;re the only words I know--how to speak. </span>
      <span id="f1369"> I&#39;ve got other words in my mind, picked &#39;em up from books, but I can&#39;t pronounce &#39;em, so I don&#39;t use &#39;em.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1370">&#34;It isn&#39;t what you say, so much as how you say it. </span>
      <span id="f1371"> You don&#39;t mind my being frank, do you? </span>
      <span id="f1372"> I don&#39;t want to hurt you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1373">&#34;No, no,&#34; he cried, while he secretly blessed her for her kindness. </span>
      <span id="f1374"> &#34;Fire away. </span>
      <span id="f1375"> I&#39;ve got to know, an&#39; I&#39;d sooner know from you than anybody else.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1376">&#34;Well, then, you say, &#39;You was&#39;; it should be, &#39;You were.&#39;  You say &#39;I seen&#39; for &#39;I saw.&#39;  You use the double negative--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1377">&#34;What&#39;s the double negative?&#34; he demanded; then added humbly, &#34;You see, I don&#39;t even understand your explanations.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1378">&#34;I&#39;m afraid I didn&#39;t explain that,&#34; she smiled. </span>
      <span id="f1379"> &#34;A double negative is--let me see--well, you say, &#39;never helped nobody.&#39;  &#39;Never&#39; is a negative. </span>
      <span id="f1380"> &#39;Nobody&#39; is another negative. </span>
      <span id="f1381"> It is a rule that two negatives make a positive. </span>
      <span id="f1382"> &#39;Never helped nobody&#39; means that, not helping nobody, they must have helped somebody.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1383">&#34;That&#39;s pretty clear,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f1384"> &#34;I never thought of it before. </span>
      <span id="f1385"> But it don&#39;t mean they _must_ have helped somebody, does it? </span>
      <span id="f1386"> Seems to me that &#39;never helped nobody&#39; just naturally fails to say whether or not they helped somebody. </span>
      <span id="f1387"> I never thought of it before, and I&#39;ll never say it again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1388">She was pleased and surprised with the quickness and surety of his mind. </span>
      <span id="f1389">As soon as he had got the clew he not only understood but corrected her error.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1390">&#34;You&#39;ll find it all in the grammar,&#34; she went on. </span>
      <span id="f1391"> &#34;There&#39;s something else I noticed in your speech. </span>
      <span id="f1392"> You say &#39;don&#39;t&#39; when you shouldn&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f1393">&#39;Don&#39;t&#39; is a contraction and stands for two words. </span>
      <span id="f1394"> Do you know them?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1395">He thought a moment, then answered, &#34;&#39;Do not.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1396">She nodded her head, and said, &#34;And you use &#39;don&#39;t&#39; when you mean &#39;does not.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1397">He was puzzled over this, and did not get it so quickly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1398">&#34;Give me an illustration,&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1399">&#34;Well--&#34;  She puckered her brows and pursed up her mouth as she thought, while he looked on and decided that her expression was most adorable. </span>
      <span id="f1400">&#34;&#39;It don&#39;t do to be hasty.&#39;  Change &#39;don&#39;t&#39; to &#39;do not,&#39; and it reads, &#39;It do not do to be hasty,&#39; which is perfectly absurd.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1401">He turned it over in his mind and considered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1402">&#34;Doesn&#39;t it jar on your ear?&#34; she suggested.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1403">&#34;Can&#39;t say that it does,&#34; he replied judicially.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1404">&#34;Why didn&#39;t you say, &#39;Can&#39;t say that it do&#39;?&#34; she queried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1405">&#34;That sounds wrong,&#34; he said slowly. </span>
      <span id="f1406"> &#34;As for the other I can&#39;t make up my mind. </span>
      <span id="f1407"> I guess my ear ain&#39;t had the trainin&#39; yours has.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1408">&#34;There is no such word as &#39;ain&#39;t,&#39;&#34; she said, prettily emphatic.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1409">Martin flushed again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1410">&#34;And you say &#39;ben&#39; for &#39;been,&#39;&#34; she continued; &#34;&#39;come&#39; for &#39;came&#39;; and the way you chop your endings is something dreadful.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1411">&#34;How do you mean?&#34;  He leaned forward, feeling that he ought to get down on his knees before so marvellous a mind. </span>
      <span id="f1412"> &#34;How do I chop?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1413">&#34;You don&#39;t complete the endings. </span>
      <span id="f1414"> &#39;A-n-d&#39; spells &#39;and.&#39;  You pronounce it &#39;an&#39;.&#39;  &#39;I-n-g&#39; spells &#39;ing.&#39;  Sometimes you pronounce it &#39;ing&#39; and sometimes you leave off the &#39;g.&#39;  And then you slur by dropping initial letters and diphthongs. </span>
      <span id="f1415"> &#39;T-h-e-m&#39; spells &#39;them.&#39;  You pronounce it--oh, well, it is not necessary to go over all of them. </span>
      <span id="f1416"> What you need is the grammar. </span>
      <span id="f1417"> I&#39;ll get one and show you how to begin.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1418">As she arose, there shot through his mind something that he had read in the etiquette books, and he stood up awkwardly, worrying as to whether he was doing the right thing, and fearing that she might take it as a sign that he was about to go.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1419">&#34;By the way, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1420">Eden,&#34; she called back, as she was leaving the room. </span>
      <span id="f1421">&#34;What is _booze_? </span>
      <span id="f1422"> You used it several times, you know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1423">&#34;Oh, booze,&#34; he laughed. </span>
      <span id="f1424"> &#34;It&#39;s slang. </span>
      <span id="f1425"> It means whiskey an&#39; beer--anything that will make you drunk.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1426">&#34;And another thing,&#34; she laughed back. </span>
      <span id="f1427"> &#34;Don&#39;t use &#39;you&#39; when you are impersonal. </span>
      <span id="f1428"> &#39;You&#39; is very personal, and your use of it just now was not precisely what you meant.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1429">&#34;I don&#39;t just see that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1430">&#34;Why, you said just now, to me, &#39;whiskey and beer--anything that will make you drunk&#39;--make me drunk, don&#39;t you see?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1431">&#34;Well, it would, wouldn&#39;t it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1432">&#34;Yes, of course,&#34; she smiled. </span>
      <span id="f1433"> &#34;But it would be nicer not to bring me into it. </span>
      <span id="f1434"> Substitute &#39;one&#39; for &#39;you&#39; and see how much better it sounds.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1435">When she returned with the grammar, she drew a chair near his--he wondered if he should have helped her with the chair--and sat down beside him. </span>
      <span id="f1436"> She turned the pages of the grammar, and their heads were inclined toward each other. </span>
      <span id="f1437"> He could hardly follow her outlining of the work he must do, so amazed was he by her delightful propinquity. </span>
      <span id="f1438"> But when she began to lay down the importance of conjugation, he forgot all about her. </span>
      <span id="f1439">He had never heard of conjugation, and was fascinated by the glimpse he was catching into the tie-ribs of language. </span>
      <span id="f1440"> He leaned closer to the page, and her hair touched his cheek. </span>
      <span id="f1441"> He had fainted but once in his life, and he thought he was going to faint again. </span>
      <span id="f1442"> He could scarcely breathe, and his heart was pounding the blood up into his throat and suffocating him. </span>
      <span id="f1443"> Never had she seemed so accessible as now. </span>
      <span id="f1444"> For the moment the great gulf that separated them was bridged. </span>
      <span id="f1445"> But there was no diminution in the loftiness of his feeling for her. </span>
      <span id="f1446"> She had not descended to him. </span>
      <span id="f1447"> It was he who had been caught up into the clouds and carried to her. </span>
      <span id="f1448"> His reverence for her, in that moment, was of the same order as religious awe and fervor. </span>
      <span id="f1449"> It seemed to him that he had intruded upon the holy of holies, and slowly and carefully he moved his head aside from the contact which thrilled him like an electric shock and of which she had not been aware.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>