<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER VIII</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1450">CHAPTER VIII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1451">Several weeks went by, during which Martin Eden studied his grammar, reviewed the books on etiquette, and read voraciously the books that caught his fancy. </span>
      <span id="f1452"> Of his own class he saw nothing. </span>
      <span id="f1453"> The girls of the Lotus Club wondered what had become of him and worried Jim with questions, and some of the fellows who put on the glove at Riley&#39;s were glad that Martin came no more. </span>
      <span id="f1454"> He made another discovery of treasure- trove in the library. </span>
      <span id="f1455"> As the grammar had shown him the tie-ribs of language, so that book showed him the tie-ribs of poetry, and he began to learn metre and construction and form, beneath the beauty he loved finding the why and wherefore of that beauty. </span>
      <span id="f1456"> Another modern book he found treated poetry as a representative art, treated it exhaustively, with copious illustrations from the best in literature. </span>
      <span id="f1457"> Never had he read fiction with so keen zest as he studied these books. </span>
      <span id="f1458"> And his fresh mind, untaxed for twenty years and impelled by maturity of desire, gripped hold of what he read with a virility unusual to the student mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1459">When he looked back now from his vantage-ground, the old world he had known, the world of land and sea and ships, of sailor-men and harpy-women, seemed a very small world; and yet it blended in with this new world and expanded. </span>
      <span id="f1460"> His mind made for unity, and he was surprised when at first he began to see points of contact between the two worlds. </span>
      <span id="f1461">And he was ennobled, as well, by the loftiness of thought and beauty he found in the books. </span>
      <span id="f1462"> This led him to believe more firmly than ever that up above him, in society like Ruth and her family, all men and women thought these thoughts and lived them. </span>
      <span id="f1463"> Down below where he lived was the ignoble, and he wanted to purge himself of the ignoble that had soiled all his days, and to rise to that sublimated realm where dwelt the upper classes. </span>
      <span id="f1464"> All his childhood and youth had been troubled by a vague unrest; he had never known what he wanted, but he had wanted something that he had hunted vainly for until he met Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f1465"> And now his unrest had become sharp and painful, and he knew at last, clearly and definitely, that it was beauty, and intellect, and love that he must have.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1466">During those several weeks he saw Ruth half a dozen times, and each time was an added inspiration. </span>
      <span id="f1467"> She helped him with his English, corrected his pronunciation, and started him on arithmetic. </span>
      <span id="f1468"> But their intercourse was not all devoted to elementary study. </span>
      <span id="f1469"> He had seen too much of life, and his mind was too matured, to be wholly content with fractions, cube root, parsing, and analysis; and there were times when their conversation turned on other themes--the last poetry he had read, the latest poet she had studied. </span>
      <span id="f1470"> And when she read aloud to him her favorite passages, he ascended to the topmost heaven of delight. </span>
      <span id="f1471"> Never, in all the women he had heard speak, had he heard a voice like hers. </span>
      <span id="f1472"> The least sound of it was a stimulus to his love, and he thrilled and throbbed with every word she uttered. </span>
      <span id="f1473"> It was the quality of it, the repose, and the musical modulation--the soft, rich, indefinable product of culture and a gentle soul. </span>
      <span id="f1474"> As he listened to her, there rang in the ears of his memory the harsh cries of barbarian women and of hags, and, in lesser degrees of harshness, the strident voices of working women and of the girls of his own class. </span>
      <span id="f1475"> Then the chemistry of vision would begin to work, and they would troop in review across his mind, each, by contrast, multiplying Ruth&#39;s glories. </span>
      <span id="f1476"> Then, too, his bliss was heightened by the knowledge that her mind was comprehending what she read and was quivering with appreciation of the beauty of the written thought. </span>
      <span id="f1477"> She read to him much from &#34;The Princess,&#34; and often he saw her eyes swimming with tears, so finely was her aesthetic nature strung. </span>
      <span id="f1478"> At such moments her own emotions elevated him till he was as a god, and, as he gazed at her and listened, he seemed gazing on the face of life and reading its deepest secrets. </span>
      <span id="f1479"> And then, becoming aware of the heights of exquisite sensibility he attained, he decided that this was love and that love was the greatest thing in the world. </span>
      <span id="f1480"> And in review would pass along the corridors of memory all previous thrills and burnings he had known,--the drunkenness of wine, the caresses of women, the rough play and give and take of physical contests,--and they seemed trivial and mean compared with this sublime ardor he now enjoyed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1481">The situation was obscured to Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f1482"> She had never had any experiences of the heart. </span>
      <span id="f1483"> Her only experiences in such matters were of the books, where the facts of ordinary day were translated by fancy into a fairy realm of unreality; and she little knew that this rough sailor was creeping into her heart and storing there pent forces that would some day burst forth and surge through her in waves of fire. </span>
      <span id="f1484"> She did not know the actual fire of love. </span>
      <span id="f1485"> Her knowledge of love was purely theoretical, and she conceived of it as lambent flame, gentle as the fall of dew or the ripple of quiet water, and cool as the velvet-dark of summer nights. </span>
      <span id="f1486"> Her idea of love was more that of placid affection, serving the loved one softly in an atmosphere, flower-scented and dim-lighted, of ethereal calm. </span>
      <span id="f1487"> She did not dream of the volcanic convulsions of love, its scorching heat and sterile wastes of parched ashes. </span>
      <span id="f1488"> She knew neither her own potencies, nor the potencies of the world; and the deeps of life were to her seas of illusion. </span>
      <span id="f1489"> The conjugal affection of her father and mother constituted her ideal of love-affinity, and she looked forward some day to emerging, without shock or friction, into that same quiet sweetness of existence with a loved one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1490">So it was that she looked upon Martin Eden as a novelty, a strange individual, and she identified with novelty and strangeness the effects he produced upon her. </span>
      <span id="f1491"> It was only natural. </span>
      <span id="f1492"> In similar ways she had experienced unusual feelings when she looked at wild animals in the menagerie, or when she witnessed a storm of wind, or shuddered at the bright-ribbed lightning. </span>
      <span id="f1493"> There was something cosmic in such things, and there was something cosmic in him. </span>
      <span id="f1494"> He came to her breathing of large airs and great spaces. </span>
      <span id="f1495"> The blaze of tropic suns was in his face, and in his swelling, resilient muscles was the primordial vigor of life. </span>
      <span id="f1496"> He was marred and scarred by that mysterious world of rough men and rougher deeds, the outposts of which began beyond her horizon. </span>
      <span id="f1497"> He was untamed, wild, and in secret ways her vanity was touched by the fact that he came so mildly to her hand. </span>
      <span id="f1498"> Likewise she was stirred by the common impulse to tame the wild thing. </span>
      <span id="f1499"> It was an unconscious impulse, and farthest from her thoughts that her desire was to re-thumb the clay of him into a likeness of her father&#39;s image, which image she believed to be the finest in the world. </span>
      <span id="f1500"> Nor was there any way, out of her inexperience, for her to know that the cosmic feel she caught of him was that most cosmic of things, love, which with equal power drew men and women together across the world, compelled stags to kill each other in the rutting season, and drove even the elements irresistibly to unite.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1501">His swift development was a source of surprise and interest. </span>
      <span id="f1502"> She detected unguessed finenesses in him that seemed to bud, day by day, like flowers in congenial soil. </span>
      <span id="f1503"> She read Browning aloud to him, and was often puzzled by the strange interpretations he gave to mooted passages. </span>
      <span id="f1504"> It was beyond her to realize that, out of his experience of men and women and life, his interpretations were far more frequently correct than hers. </span>
      <span id="f1505">His conceptions seemed naive to her, though she was often fired by his daring flights of comprehension, whose orbit-path was so wide among the stars that she could not follow and could only sit and thrill to the impact of unguessed power. </span>
      <span id="f1506"> Then she played to him--no longer at him--and probed him with music that sank to depths beyond her plumb-line. </span>
      <span id="f1507"> His nature opened to music as a flower to the sun, and the transition was quick from his working-class rag-time and jingles to her classical display pieces that she knew nearly by heart. </span>
      <span id="f1508"> Yet he betrayed a democratic fondness for Wagner, and the &#34;Tannhauser&#34; overture, when she had given him the clew to it, claimed him as nothing else she played. </span>
      <span id="f1509"> In an immediate way it personified his life. </span>
      <span id="f1510"> All his past was the Venusburg motif, while her he identified somehow with the Pilgrim&#39;s Chorus motif; and from the exalted state this elevated him to, he swept onward and upward into that vast shadow-realm of spirit-groping, where good and evil war eternally.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1511">Sometimes he questioned, and induced in her mind temporary doubts as to the correctness of her own definitions and conceptions of music. </span>
      <span id="f1512"> But her singing he did not question. </span>
      <span id="f1513"> It was too wholly her, and he sat always amazed at the divine melody of her pure soprano voice. </span>
      <span id="f1514"> And he could not help but contrast it with the weak pipings and shrill quaverings of factory girls, ill-nourished and untrained, and with the raucous shriekings from gin-cracked throats of the women of the seaport towns. </span>
      <span id="f1515">She enjoyed singing and playing to him. </span>
      <span id="f1516"> In truth, it was the first time she had ever had a human soul to play with, and the plastic clay of him was a delight to mould; for she thought she was moulding it, and her intentions were good. </span>
      <span id="f1517"> Besides, it was pleasant to be with him. </span>
      <span id="f1518"> He did not repel her. </span>
      <span id="f1519"> That first repulsion had been really a fear of her undiscovered self, and the fear had gone to sleep. </span>
      <span id="f1520"> Though she did not know it, she had a feeling in him of proprietary right. </span>
      <span id="f1521"> Also, he had a tonic effect upon her. </span>
      <span id="f1522"> She was studying hard at the university, and it seemed to strengthen her to emerge from the dusty books and have the fresh sea-breeze of his personality blow upon her. </span>
      <span id="f1523"> Strength! </span>
      <span id="f1524"> Strength was what she needed, and he gave it to her in generous measure. </span>
      <span id="f1525"> To come into the same room with him, or to meet him at the door, was to take heart of life. </span>
      <span id="f1526"> And when he had gone, she would return to her books with a keener zest and fresh store of energy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1527">She knew her Browning, but it had never sunk into her that it was an awkward thing to play with souls. </span>
      <span id="f1528"> As her interest in Martin increased, the remodelling of his life became a passion with her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1529">&#34;There is Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1530">Butler,&#34; she said one afternoon, when grammar and arithmetic and poetry had been put aside.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1531">&#34;He had comparatively no advantages at first. </span>
      <span id="f1532"> His father had been a bank cashier, but he lingered for years, dying of consumption in Arizona, so that when he was dead, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1533">Butler, Charles Butler he was called, found himself alone in the world. </span>
      <span id="f1534"> His father had come from Australia, you know, and so he had no relatives in California. </span>
      <span id="f1535"> He went to work in a printing-office,--I have heard him tell of it many times,--and he got three dollars a week, at first. </span>
      <span id="f1536"> His income to-day is at least thirty thousand a year. </span>
      <span id="f1537"> How did he do it? </span>
      <span id="f1538"> He was honest, and faithful, and industrious, and economical. </span>
      <span id="f1539"> He denied himself the enjoyments that most boys indulge in. </span>
      <span id="f1540"> He made it a point to save so much every week, no matter what he had to do without in order to save it. </span>
      <span id="f1541"> Of course, he was soon earning more than three dollars a week, and as his wages increased he saved more and more.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1542">&#34;He worked in the daytime, and at night he went to night school. </span>
      <span id="f1543"> He had his eyes fixed always on the future. </span>
      <span id="f1544"> Later on he went to night high school. </span>
      <span id="f1545"> When he was only seventeen, he was earning excellent wages at setting type, but he was ambitious. </span>
      <span id="f1546"> He wanted a career, not a livelihood, and he was content to make immediate sacrifices for his ultimate again. </span>
      <span id="f1547"> He decided upon the law, and he entered father&#39;s office as an office boy--think of that!--and got only four dollars a week. </span>
      <span id="f1548"> But he had learned how to be economical, and out of that four dollars he went on saving money.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1549">She paused for breath, and to note how Martin was receiving it. </span>
      <span id="f1550"> His face was lighted up with interest in the youthful struggles of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1551">Butler; but there was a frown upon his face as well.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1552">&#34;I&#39;d say they was pretty hard lines for a young fellow,&#34; he remarked. </span>
      <span id="f1553">&#34;Four dollars a week! </span>
      <span id="f1554"> How could he live on it? </span>
      <span id="f1555"> You can bet he didn&#39;t have any frills. </span>
      <span id="f1556"> Why, I pay five dollars a week for board now, an&#39; there&#39;s nothin&#39; excitin&#39; about it, you can lay to that. </span>
      <span id="f1557"> He must have lived like a dog. </span>
      <span id="f1558"> The food he ate--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1559">&#34;He cooked for himself,&#34; she interrupted, &#34;on a little kerosene stove.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1560">&#34;The food he ate must have been worse than what a sailor gets on the worst-feedin&#39; deep-water ships, than which there ain&#39;t much that can be possibly worse.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1561">&#34;But think of him now!&#34; she cried enthusiastically. </span>
      <span id="f1562"> &#34;Think of what his income affords him. </span>
      <span id="f1563"> His early denials are paid for a thousand-fold.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1564">Martin looked at her sharply.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1565">&#34;There&#39;s one thing I&#39;ll bet you,&#34; he said, &#34;and it is that Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1566">Butler is nothin&#39; gay-hearted now in his fat days. </span>
      <span id="f1567"> He fed himself like that for years an&#39; years, on a boy&#39;s stomach, an&#39; I bet his stomach&#39;s none too good now for it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1568">Her eyes dropped before his searching gaze.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1569">&#34;I&#39;ll bet he&#39;s got dyspepsia right now!&#34; Martin challenged.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1570">&#34;Yes, he has,&#34; she confessed; &#34;but--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1571">&#34;An&#39; I bet,&#34; Martin dashed on, &#34;that he&#39;s solemn an&#39; serious as an old owl, an&#39; doesn&#39;t care a rap for a good time, for all his thirty thousand a year. </span>
      <span id="f1572"> An&#39; I&#39;ll bet he&#39;s not particularly joyful at seein&#39; others have a good time. </span>
      <span id="f1573"> Ain&#39;t I right?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1574">She nodded her head in agreement, and hastened to explain:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1575">&#34;But he is not that type of man. </span>
      <span id="f1576"> By nature he is sober and serious. </span>
      <span id="f1577"> He always was that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1578">&#34;You can bet he was,&#34; Martin proclaimed. </span>
      <span id="f1579"> &#34;Three dollars a week, an&#39; four dollars a week, an&#39; a young boy cookin&#39; for himself on an oil-burner an&#39; layin&#39; up money, workin&#39; all day an&#39; studyin&#39; all night, just workin&#39; an&#39; never playin&#39;, never havin&#39; a good time, an&#39; never learnin&#39; how to have a good time--of course his thirty thousand came along too late.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1580">His sympathetic imagination was flashing upon his inner sight all the thousands of details of the boy&#39;s existence and of his narrow spiritual development into a thirty-thousand-dollar-a-year man. </span>
      <span id="f1581"> With the swiftness and wide-reaching of multitudinous thought Charles Butler&#39;s whole life was telescoped upon his vision.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1582">&#34;Do you know,&#34; he added, &#34;I feel sorry for Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1583">Butler. </span>
      <span id="f1584"> He was too young to know better, but he robbed himself of life for the sake of thirty thousand a year that&#39;s clean wasted upon him. </span>
      <span id="f1585"> Why, thirty thousand, lump sum, wouldn&#39;t buy for him right now what ten cents he was layin&#39; up would have bought him, when he was a kid, in the way of candy an&#39; peanuts or a seat in nigger heaven.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1586">It was just such uniqueness of points of view that startled Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f1587"> Not only were they new to her, and contrary to her own beliefs, but she always felt in them germs of truth that threatened to unseat or modify her own convictions. </span>
      <span id="f1588"> Had she been fourteen instead of twenty-four, she might have been changed by them; but she was twenty-four, conservative by nature and upbringing, and already crystallized into the cranny of life where she had been born and formed. </span>
      <span id="f1589"> It was true, his bizarre judgments troubled her in the moments they were uttered, but she ascribed them to his novelty of type and strangeness of living, and they were soon forgotten. </span>
      <span id="f1590"> Nevertheless, while she disapproved of them, the strength of their utterance, and the flashing of eyes and earnestness of face that accompanied them, always thrilled her and drew her toward him. </span>
      <span id="f1591"> She would never have guessed that this man who had come from beyond her horizon, was, in such moments, flashing on beyond her horizon with wider and deeper concepts. </span>
      <span id="f1592"> Her own limits were the limits of her horizon; but limited minds can recognize limitations only in others. </span>
      <span id="f1593"> And so she felt that her outlook was very wide indeed, and that where his conflicted with hers marked his limitations; and she dreamed of helping him to see as she saw, of widening his horizon until it was identified with hers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1594">&#34;But I have not finished my story,&#34; she said. </span>
      <span id="f1595"> &#34;He worked, so father says, as no other office boy he ever had. </span>
      <span id="f1596"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1597">Butler was always eager to work. </span>
      <span id="f1598"> He never was late, and he was usually at the office a few minutes before his regular time. </span>
      <span id="f1599"> And yet he saved his time. </span>
      <span id="f1600"> Every spare moment was devoted to study. </span>
      <span id="f1601"> He studied book-keeping and type-writing, and he paid for lessons in shorthand by dictating at night to a court reporter who needed practice. </span>
      <span id="f1602"> He quickly became a clerk, and he made himself invaluable. </span>
      <span id="f1603"> Father appreciated him and saw that he was bound to rise. </span>
      <span id="f1604"> It was on father&#39;s suggestion that he went to law college. </span>
      <span id="f1605"> He became a lawyer, and hardly was he back in the office when father took him in as junior partner. </span>
      <span id="f1606"> He is a great man. </span>
      <span id="f1607"> He refused the United States Senate several times, and father says he could become a justice of the Supreme Court any time a vacancy occurs, if he wants to. </span>
      <span id="f1608"> Such a life is an inspiration to all of us. </span>
      <span id="f1609"> It shows us that a man with will may rise superior to his environment.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1610">&#34;He is a great man,&#34; Martin said sincerely.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1611">But it seemed to him there was something in the recital that jarred upon his sense of beauty and life. </span>
      <span id="f1612"> He could not find an adequate motive in Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1613">Butler&#39;s life of pinching and privation. </span>
      <span id="f1614"> Had he done it for love of a woman, or for attainment of beauty, Martin would have understood. </span>
      <span id="f1615"> God&#39;s own mad lover should do anything for the kiss, but not for thirty thousand dollars a year. </span>
      <span id="f1616"> He was dissatisfied with Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1617">Butler&#39;s career. </span>
      <span id="f1618">There was something paltry about it, after all. </span>
      <span id="f1619"> Thirty thousand a year was all right, but dyspepsia and inability to be humanly happy robbed such princely income of all its value.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1620">Much of this he strove to express to Ruth, and shocked her and made it clear that more remodelling was necessary. </span>
      <span id="f1621"> Hers was that common insularity of mind that makes human creatures believe that their color, creed, and politics are best and right and that other human creatures scattered over the world are less fortunately placed than they. </span>
      <span id="f1622"> It was the same insularity of mind that made the ancient Jew thank God he was not born a woman, and sent the modern missionary god-substituting to the ends of the earth; and it made Ruth desire to shape this man from other crannies of life into the likeness of the men who lived in her particular cranny of life.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>