<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER X</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1792">CHAPTER X</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1793">He stopped to dinner that evening, and, much to Ruth&#39;s satisfaction, made a favorable impression on her father. </span>
      <span id="f1794"> They talked about the sea as a career, a subject which Martin had at his finger-ends, and Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1795">Morse remarked afterward that he seemed a very clear-headed young man. </span>
      <span id="f1796"> In his avoidance of slang and his search after right words, Martin was compelled to talk slowly, which enabled him to find the best thoughts that were in him. </span>
      <span id="f1797"> He was more at ease than that first night at dinner, nearly a year before, and his shyness and modesty even commended him to Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1798">Morse, who was pleased at his manifest improvement.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1799">&#34;He is the first man that ever drew passing notice from Ruth,&#34; she told her husband. </span>
      <span id="f1800"> &#34;She has been so singularly backward where men are concerned that I have been worried greatly.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1801">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1802">Morse looked at his wife curiously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1803">&#34;You mean to use this young sailor to wake her up?&#34; he questioned.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1804">&#34;I mean that she is not to die an old maid if I can help it,&#34; was the answer. </span>
      <span id="f1805"> &#34;If this young Eden can arouse her interest in mankind in general, it will be a good thing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1806">&#34;A very good thing,&#34; he commented. </span>
      <span id="f1807"> &#34;But suppose,--and we must suppose, sometimes, my dear,--suppose he arouses her interest too particularly in him?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1808">&#34;Impossible,&#34; Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1809">Morse laughed. </span>
      <span id="f1810"> &#34;She is three years older than he, and, besides, it is impossible. </span>
      <span id="f1811"> Nothing will ever come of it. </span>
      <span id="f1812"> Trust that to me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1813">And so Martin&#39;s role was arranged for him, while he, led on by Arthur and Norman, was meditating an extravagance. </span>
      <span id="f1814"> They were going out for a ride into the hills Sunday morning on their wheels, which did not interest Martin until he learned that Ruth, too, rode a wheel and was going along. </span>
      <span id="f1815">He did not ride, nor own a wheel, but if Ruth rode, it was up to him to begin, was his decision; and when he said good night, he stopped in at a cyclery on his way home and spent forty dollars for a wheel. </span>
      <span id="f1816"> It was more than a month&#39;s hard-earned wages, and it reduced his stock of money amazingly; but when he added the hundred dollars he was to receive from the Examiner to the four hundred and twenty dollars that was the least The Youth&#39;s Companion could pay him, he felt that he had reduced the perplexity the unwonted amount of money had caused him. </span>
      <span id="f1817"> Nor did he mind, in the course of learning to ride the wheel home, the fact that he ruined his suit of clothes. </span>
      <span id="f1818"> He caught the tailor by telephone that night from Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1819">Higginbotham&#39;s store and ordered another suit. </span>
      <span id="f1820"> Then he carried the wheel up the narrow stairway that clung like a fire-escape to the rear wall of the building, and when he had moved his bed out from the wall, found there was just space enough in the small room for himself and the wheel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1821">Sunday he had intended to devote to studying for the high school examination, but the pearl-diving article lured him away, and he spent the day in the white-hot fever of re-creating the beauty and romance that burned in him. </span>
      <span id="f1822"> The fact that the Examiner of that morning had failed to publish his treasure-hunting article did not dash his spirits. </span>
      <span id="f1823"> He was at too great a height for that, and having been deaf to a twice-repeated summons, he went without the heavy Sunday dinner with which Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1824">Higginbotham invariably graced his table. </span>
      <span id="f1825"> To Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1826">Higginbotham such a dinner was advertisement of his worldly achievement and prosperity, and he honored it by delivering platitudinous sermonettes upon American institutions and the opportunity said institutions gave to any hard-working man to rise--the rise, in his case, which he pointed out unfailingly, being from a grocer&#39;s clerk to the ownership of Higginbotham&#39;s Cash Store.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1827">Martin Eden looked with a sigh at his unfinished &#34;Pearl-diving&#34; on Monday morning, and took the car down to Oakland to the high school. </span>
      <span id="f1828"> And when, days later, he applied for the results of his examinations, he learned that he had failed in everything save grammar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1829">&#34;Your grammar is excellent,&#34; Professor Hilton informed him, staring at him through heavy spectacles; &#34;but you know nothing, positively nothing, in the other branches, and your United States history is abominable--there is no other word for it, abominable. </span>
      <span id="f1830"> I should advise you--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1831">Professor Hilton paused and glared at him, unsympathetic and unimaginative as one of his own test-tubes. </span>
      <span id="f1832"> He was professor of physics in the high school, possessor of a large family, a meagre salary, and a select fund of parrot-learned knowledge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1833">&#34;Yes, sir,&#34; Martin said humbly, wishing somehow that the man at the desk in the library was in Professor Hilton&#39;s place just then.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1834">&#34;And I should advise you to go back to the grammar school for at least two years. </span>
      <span id="f1835"> Good day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1836">Martin was not deeply affected by his failure, though he was surprised at Ruth&#39;s shocked expression when he told her Professor Hilton&#39;s advice. </span>
      <span id="f1837"> Her disappointment was so evident that he was sorry he had failed, but chiefly so for her sake.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1838">&#34;You see I was right,&#34; she said. </span>
      <span id="f1839"> &#34;You know far more than any of the students entering high school, and yet you can&#39;t pass the examinations. </span>
      <span id="f1840">It is because what education you have is fragmentary, sketchy. </span>
      <span id="f1841"> You need the discipline of study, such as only skilled teachers can give you. </span>
      <span id="f1842"> You must be thoroughly grounded. </span>
      <span id="f1843"> Professor Hilton is right, and if I were you, I&#39;d go to night school. </span>
      <span id="f1844"> A year and a half of it might enable you to catch up that additional six months. </span>
      <span id="f1845"> Besides, that would leave you your days in which to write, or, if you could not make your living by your pen, you would have your days in which to work in some position.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1846">But if my days are taken up with work and my nights with school, when am I going to see you?--was Martin&#39;s first thought, though he refrained from uttering it. </span>
      <span id="f1847"> Instead, he said:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1848">&#34;It seems so babyish for me to be going to night school. </span>
      <span id="f1849"> But I wouldn&#39;t mind that if I thought it would pay. </span>
      <span id="f1850"> But I don&#39;t think it will pay. </span>
      <span id="f1851"> I can do the work quicker than they can teach me. </span>
      <span id="f1852"> It would be a loss of time--&#34; he thought of her and his desire to have her--&#34;and I can&#39;t afford the time. </span>
      <span id="f1853"> I haven&#39;t the time to spare, in fact.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1854">&#34;There is so much that is necessary.&#34;  She looked at him gently, and he was a brute to oppose her. </span>
      <span id="f1855"> &#34;Physics and chemistry--you can&#39;t do them without laboratory study; and you&#39;ll find algebra and geometry almost hopeless without instruction. </span>
      <span id="f1856"> You need the skilled teachers, the specialists in the art of imparting knowledge.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1857">He was silent for a minute, casting about for the least vainglorious way in which to express himself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1858">&#34;Please don&#39;t think I&#39;m bragging,&#34; he began. </span>
      <span id="f1859"> &#34;I don&#39;t intend it that way at all. </span>
      <span id="f1860"> But I have a feeling that I am what I may call a natural student. </span>
      <span id="f1861"> I can study by myself. </span>
      <span id="f1862"> I take to it kindly, like a duck to water. </span>
      <span id="f1863"> You see yourself what I did with grammar. </span>
      <span id="f1864"> And I&#39;ve learned much of other things--you would never dream how much. </span>
      <span id="f1865"> And I&#39;m only getting started. </span>
      <span id="f1866"> Wait till I get--&#34;  He hesitated and assured himself of the pronunciation before he said &#34;momentum. </span>
      <span id="f1867"> I&#39;m getting my first real feel of things now. </span>
      <span id="f1868"> I&#39;m beginning to size up the situation--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1869">&#34;Please don&#39;t say &#39;size up,&#39;&#34; she interrupted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1870">&#34;To get a line on things,&#34; he hastily amended.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1871">&#34;That doesn&#39;t mean anything in correct English,&#34; she objected.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1872">He floundered for a fresh start.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1873">&#34;What I&#39;m driving at is that I&#39;m beginning to get the lay of the land.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1874">Out of pity she forebore, and he went on.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1875">&#34;Knowledge seems to me like a chart-room. </span>
      <span id="f1876"> Whenever I go into the library, I am impressed that way. </span>
      <span id="f1877"> The part played by teachers is to teach the student the contents of the chart-room in a systematic way. </span>
      <span id="f1878"> The teachers are guides to the chart-room, that&#39;s all. </span>
      <span id="f1879"> It&#39;s not something that they have in their own heads. </span>
      <span id="f1880"> They don&#39;t make it up, don&#39;t create it. </span>
      <span id="f1881"> It&#39;s all in the chart-room and they know their way about in it, and it&#39;s their business to show the place to strangers who might else get lost. </span>
      <span id="f1882"> Now I don&#39;t get lost easily. </span>
      <span id="f1883"> I have the bump of location. </span>
      <span id="f1884"> I usually know where I&#39;m at--What&#39;s wrong now?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1885">&#34;Don&#39;t say &#39;where I&#39;m at.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1886">&#34;That&#39;s right,&#34; he said gratefully, &#34;where I am. </span>
      <span id="f1887"> But where am I at--I mean, where am I? </span>
      <span id="f1888"> Oh, yes, in the chart-room. </span>
      <span id="f1889"> Well, some people--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1890">&#34;Persons,&#34; she corrected.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1891">&#34;Some persons need guides, most persons do; but I think I can get along without them. </span>
      <span id="f1892"> I&#39;ve spent a lot of time in the chart-room now, and I&#39;m on the edge of knowing my way about, what charts I want to refer to, what coasts I want to explore. </span>
      <span id="f1893"> And from the way I line it up, I&#39;ll explore a whole lot more quickly by myself. </span>
      <span id="f1894"> The speed of a fleet, you know, is the speed of the slowest ship, and the speed of the teachers is affected the same way. </span>
      <span id="f1895"> They can&#39;t go any faster than the ruck of their scholars, and I can set a faster pace for myself than they set for a whole schoolroom.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1896">&#34;&#39;He travels the fastest who travels alone,&#39;&#34; she quoted at him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1897">But I&#39;d travel faster with you just the same, was what he wanted to blurt out, as he caught a vision of a world without end of sunlit spaces and starry voids through which he drifted with her, his arm around her, her pale gold hair blowing about his face. </span>
      <span id="f1898"> In the same instant he was aware of the pitiful inadequacy of speech. </span>
      <span id="f1899"> God! </span>
      <span id="f1900"> If he could so frame words that she could see what he then saw! </span>
      <span id="f1901"> And he felt the stir in him, like a throe of yearning pain, of the desire to paint these visions that flashed unsummoned on the mirror of his mind. </span>
      <span id="f1902"> Ah, that was it! </span>
      <span id="f1903"> He caught at the hem of the secret. </span>
      <span id="f1904"> It was the very thing that the great writers and master-poets did. </span>
      <span id="f1905"> That was why they were giants. </span>
      <span id="f1906"> They knew how to express what they thought, and felt, and saw. </span>
      <span id="f1907"> Dogs asleep in the sun often whined and barked, but they were unable to tell what they saw that made them whine and bark. </span>
      <span id="f1908"> He had often wondered what it was. </span>
      <span id="f1909"> And that was all he was, a dog asleep in the sun. </span>
      <span id="f1910"> He saw noble and beautiful visions, but he could only whine and bark at Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f1911"> But he would cease sleeping in the sun. </span>
      <span id="f1912"> He would stand up, with open eyes, and he would struggle and toil and learn until, with eyes unblinded and tongue untied, he could share with her his visioned wealth. </span>
      <span id="f1913"> Other men had discovered the trick of expression, of making words obedient servitors, and of making combinations of words mean more than the sum of their separate meanings. </span>
      <span id="f1914"> He was stirred profoundly by the passing glimpse at the secret, and he was again caught up in the vision of sunlit spaces and starry voids--until it came to him that it was very quiet, and he saw Ruth regarding him with an amused expression and a smile in her eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1915">&#34;I have had a great visioning,&#34; he said, and at the sound of his words in his own ears his heart gave a leap. </span>
      <span id="f1916"> Where had those words come from? </span>
      <span id="f1917">They had adequately expressed the pause his vision had put in the conversation. </span>
      <span id="f1918"> It was a miracle. </span>
      <span id="f1919"> Never had he so loftily framed a lofty thought. </span>
      <span id="f1920"> But never had he attempted to frame lofty thoughts in words. </span>
      <span id="f1921">That was it. </span>
      <span id="f1922"> That explained it. </span>
      <span id="f1923"> He had never tried. </span>
      <span id="f1924"> But Swinburne had, and Tennyson, and Kipling, and all the other poets. </span>
      <span id="f1925"> His mind flashed on to his &#34;Pearl-diving.&#34;  He had never dared the big things, the spirit of the beauty that was a fire in him. </span>
      <span id="f1926"> That article would be a different thing when he was done with it. </span>
      <span id="f1927"> He was appalled by the vastness of the beauty that rightfully belonged in it, and again his mind flashed and dared, and he demanded of himself why he could not chant that beauty in noble verse as the great poets did. </span>
      <span id="f1928"> And there was all the mysterious delight and spiritual wonder of his love for Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f1929"> Why could he not chant that, too, as the poets did? </span>
      <span id="f1930"> They had sung of love. </span>
      <span id="f1931"> So would he. </span>
      <span id="f1932">By God!--</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1933">And in his frightened ears he heard his exclamation echoing. </span>
      <span id="f1934"> Carried away, he had breathed it aloud. </span>
      <span id="f1935"> The blood surged into his face, wave upon wave, mastering the bronze of it till the blush of shame flaunted itself from collar-rim to the roots of his hair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1936">&#34;I--I--beg your pardon,&#34; he stammered. </span>
      <span id="f1937"> &#34;I was thinking.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1938">&#34;It sounded as if you were praying,&#34; she said bravely, but she felt herself inside to be withering and shrinking. </span>
      <span id="f1939"> It was the first time she had heard an oath from the lips of a man she knew, and she was shocked, not merely as a matter of principle and training, but shocked in spirit by this rough blast of life in the garden of her sheltered maidenhood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1940">But she forgave, and with surprise at the ease of her forgiveness. </span>
      <span id="f1941">Somehow it was not so difficult to forgive him anything. </span>
      <span id="f1942"> He had not had a chance to be as other men, and he was trying so hard, and succeeding, too. </span>
      <span id="f1943"> It never entered her head that there could be any other reason for her being kindly disposed toward him. </span>
      <span id="f1944"> She was tenderly disposed toward him, but she did not know it. </span>
      <span id="f1945"> She had no way of knowing it. </span>
      <span id="f1946"> The placid poise of twenty-four years without a single love affair did not fit her with a keen perception of her own feelings, and she who had never warmed to actual love was unaware that she was warming now.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>