<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XI</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1947">CHAPTER XI</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1948">Martin went back to his pearl-diving article, which would have been finished sooner if it had not been broken in upon so frequently by his attempts to write poetry. </span>
      <span id="f1949"> His poems were love poems, inspired by Ruth, but they were never completed. </span>
      <span id="f1950"> Not in a day could he learn to chant in noble verse. </span>
      <span id="f1951"> Rhyme and metre and structure were serious enough in themselves, but there was, over and beyond them, an intangible and evasive something that he caught in all great poetry, but which he could not catch and imprison in his own. </span>
      <span id="f1952"> It was the elusive spirit of poetry itself that he sensed and sought after but could not capture. </span>
      <span id="f1953"> It seemed a glow to him, a warm and trailing vapor, ever beyond his reaching, though sometimes he was rewarded by catching at shreds of it and weaving them into phrases that echoed in his brain with haunting notes or drifted across his vision in misty wafture of unseen beauty. </span>
      <span id="f1954"> It was baffling. </span>
      <span id="f1955"> He ached with desire to express and could but gibber prosaically as everybody gibbered. </span>
      <span id="f1956"> He read his fragments aloud. </span>
      <span id="f1957"> The metre marched along on perfect feet, and the rhyme pounded a longer and equally faultless rhythm, but the glow and high exaltation that he felt within were lacking. </span>
      <span id="f1958"> He could not understand, and time and again, in despair, defeated and depressed, he returned to his article. </span>
      <span id="f1959"> Prose was certainly an easier medium.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1960">Following the &#34;Pearl-diving,&#34; he wrote an article on the sea as a career, another on turtle-catching, and a third on the northeast trades. </span>
      <span id="f1961"> Then he tried, as an experiment, a short story, and before he broke his stride he had finished six short stories and despatched them to various magazines. </span>
      <span id="f1962">He wrote prolifically, intensely, from morning till night, and late at night, except when he broke off to go to the reading-room, draw books from the library, or to call on Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f1963"> He was profoundly happy. </span>
      <span id="f1964"> Life was pitched high. </span>
      <span id="f1965"> He was in a fever that never broke. </span>
      <span id="f1966"> The joy of creation that is supposed to belong to the gods was his. </span>
      <span id="f1967"> All the life about him--the odors of stale vegetables and soapsuds, the slatternly form of his sister, and the jeering face of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1968">Higginbotham--was a dream. </span>
      <span id="f1969"> The real world was in his mind, and the stories he wrote were so many pieces of reality out of his mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1970">The days were too short. </span>
      <span id="f1971"> There was so much he wanted to study. </span>
      <span id="f1972"> He cut his sleep down to five hours and found that he could get along upon it. </span>
      <span id="f1973">He tried four hours and a half, and regretfully came back to five. </span>
      <span id="f1974"> He could joyfully have spent all his waking hours upon any one of his pursuits. </span>
      <span id="f1975"> It was with regret that he ceased from writing to study, that he ceased from study to go to the library, that he tore himself away from that chart-room of knowledge or from the magazines in the reading-room that were filled with the secrets of writers who succeeded in selling their wares. </span>
      <span id="f1976"> It was like severing heart strings, when he was with Ruth, to stand up and go; and he scorched through the dark streets so as to get home to his books at the least possible expense of time. </span>
      <span id="f1977"> And hardest of all was it to shut up the algebra or physics, put note-book and pencil aside, and close his tired eyes in sleep. </span>
      <span id="f1978"> He hated the thought of ceasing to live, even for so short a time, and his sole consolation was that the alarm clock was set five hours ahead. </span>
      <span id="f1979"> He would lose only five hours anyway, and then the jangling bell would jerk him out of unconsciousness and he would have before him another glorious day of nineteen hours.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1980">In the meantime the weeks were passing, his money was ebbing low, and there was no money coming in. </span>
      <span id="f1981"> A month after he had mailed it, the adventure serial for boys was returned to him by The Youth&#39;s Companion. </span>
      <span id="f1982">The rejection slip was so tactfully worded that he felt kindly toward the editor. </span>
      <span id="f1983"> But he did not feel so kindly toward the editor of the San Francisco Examiner. </span>
      <span id="f1984"> After waiting two whole weeks, Martin had written to him. </span>
      <span id="f1985"> A week later he wrote again. </span>
      <span id="f1986"> At the end of the month, he went over to San Francisco and personally called upon the editor. </span>
      <span id="f1987"> But he did not meet that exalted personage, thanks to a Cerberus of an office boy, of tender years and red hair, who guarded the portals. </span>
      <span id="f1988"> At the end of the fifth week the manuscript came back to him, by mail, without comment. </span>
      <span id="f1989">There was no rejection slip, no explanation, nothing. </span>
      <span id="f1990"> In the same way his other articles were tied up with the other leading San Francisco papers. </span>
      <span id="f1991"> When he recovered them, he sent them to the magazines in the East, from which they were returned more promptly, accompanied always by the printed rejection slips.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1992">The short stories were returned in similar fashion. </span>
      <span id="f1993"> He read them over and over, and liked them so much that he could not puzzle out the cause of their rejection, until, one day, he read in a newspaper that manuscripts should always be typewritten. </span>
      <span id="f1994"> That explained it. </span>
      <span id="f1995"> Of course editors were so busy that they could not afford the time and strain of reading handwriting. </span>
      <span id="f1996"> Martin rented a typewriter and spent a day mastering the machine. </span>
      <span id="f1997"> Each day he typed what he composed, and he typed his earlier manuscripts as fast as they were returned him. </span>
      <span id="f1998"> He was surprised when the typed ones began to come back. </span>
      <span id="f1999"> His jaw seemed to become squarer, his chin more aggressive, and he bundled the manuscripts off to new editors.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2000">The thought came to him that he was not a good judge of his own work. </span>
      <span id="f2001"> He tried it out on Gertrude. </span>
      <span id="f2002"> He read his stories aloud to her. </span>
      <span id="f2003"> Her eyes glistened, and she looked at him proudly as she said:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2004">&#34;Ain&#39;t it grand, you writin&#39; those sort of things.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2005">&#34;Yes, yes,&#34; he demanded impatiently. </span>
      <span id="f2006"> &#34;But the story--how did you like it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2007">&#34;Just grand,&#34; was the reply. </span>
      <span id="f2008"> &#34;Just grand, an&#39; thrilling, too. </span>
      <span id="f2009"> I was all worked up.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2010">He could see that her mind was not clear. </span>
      <span id="f2011"> The perplexity was strong in her good-natured face. </span>
      <span id="f2012"> So he waited.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2013">&#34;But, say, Mart,&#34; after a long pause, &#34;how did it end? </span>
      <span id="f2014"> Did that young man who spoke so highfalutin&#39; get her?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2015">And, after he had explained the end, which he thought he had made artistically obvious, she would say:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2016">&#34;That&#39;s what I wanted to know. </span>
      <span id="f2017"> Why didn&#39;t you write that way in the story?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2018">One thing he learned, after he had read her a number of stories, namely, that she liked happy endings.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2019">&#34;That story was perfectly grand,&#34; she announced, straightening up from the wash-tub with a tired sigh and wiping the sweat from her forehead with a red, steamy hand; &#34;but it makes me sad. </span>
      <span id="f2020"> I want to cry. </span>
      <span id="f2021"> There is too many sad things in the world anyway. </span>
      <span id="f2022"> It makes me happy to think about happy things. </span>
      <span id="f2023"> Now if he&#39;d married her, and--You don&#39;t mind, Mart?&#34; she queried apprehensively. </span>
      <span id="f2024"> &#34;I just happen to feel that way, because I&#39;m tired, I guess. </span>
      <span id="f2025"> But the story was grand just the same, perfectly grand. </span>
      <span id="f2026">Where are you goin&#39; to sell it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2027">&#34;That&#39;s a horse of another color,&#34; he laughed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2028">&#34;But if you _did_ sell it, what do you think you&#39;d get for it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2029">&#34;Oh, a hundred dollars. </span>
      <span id="f2030"> That would be the least, the way prices go.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2031">&#34;My! </span>
      <span id="f2032"> I do hope you&#39;ll sell it!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2033">&#34;Easy money, eh?&#34;  Then he added proudly: &#34;I wrote it in two days. </span>
      <span id="f2034"> That&#39;s fifty dollars a day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2035">He longed to read his stories to Ruth, but did not dare. </span>
      <span id="f2036"> He would wait till some were published, he decided, then she would understand what he had been working for. </span>
      <span id="f2037"> In the meantime he toiled on. </span>
      <span id="f2038"> Never had the spirit of adventure lured him more strongly than on this amazing exploration of the realm of mind. </span>
      <span id="f2039"> He bought the text-books on physics and chemistry, and, along with his algebra, worked out problems and demonstrations. </span>
      <span id="f2040"> He took the laboratory proofs on faith, and his intense power of vision enabled him to see the reactions of chemicals more understandingly than the average student saw them in the laboratory. </span>
      <span id="f2041">Martin wandered on through the heavy pages, overwhelmed by the clews he was getting to the nature of things. </span>
      <span id="f2042"> He had accepted the world as the world, but now he was comprehending the organization of it, the play and interplay of force and matter. </span>
      <span id="f2043"> Spontaneous explanations of old matters were continually arising in his mind. </span>
      <span id="f2044"> Levers and purchases fascinated him, and his mind roved backward to hand-spikes and blocks and tackles at sea. </span>
      <span id="f2045"> The theory of navigation, which enabled the ships to travel unerringly their courses over the pathless ocean, was made clear to him. </span>
      <span id="f2046">The mysteries of storm, and rain, and tide were revealed, and the reason for the existence of trade-winds made him wonder whether he had written his article on the northeast trade too soon. </span>
      <span id="f2047"> At any rate he knew he could write it better now. </span>
      <span id="f2048"> One afternoon he went out with Arthur to the University of California, and, with bated breath and a feeling of religious awe, went through the laboratories, saw demonstrations, and listened to a physics professor lecturing to his classes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2049">But he did not neglect his writing. </span>
      <span id="f2050"> A stream of short stories flowed from his pen, and he branched out into the easier forms of verse--the kind he saw printed in the magazines--though he lost his head and wasted two weeks on a tragedy in blank verse, the swift rejection of which, by half a dozen magazines, dumfounded him. </span>
      <span id="f2051"> Then he discovered Henley and wrote a series of sea-poems on the model of &#34;Hospital Sketches.&#34;  They were simple poems, of light and color, and romance and adventure. </span>
      <span id="f2052"> &#34;Sea Lyrics,&#34; he called them, and he judged them to be the best work he had yet done. </span>
      <span id="f2053"> There were thirty, and he completed them in a month, doing one a day after having done his regular day&#39;s work on fiction, which day&#39;s work was the equivalent to a week&#39;s work of the average successful writer. </span>
      <span id="f2054"> The toil meant nothing to him. </span>
      <span id="f2055"> It was not toil. </span>
      <span id="f2056"> He was finding speech, and all the beauty and wonder that had been pent for years behind his inarticulate lips was now pouring forth in a wild and virile flood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2057">He showed the &#34;Sea Lyrics&#34; to no one, not even to the editors. </span>
      <span id="f2058"> He had become distrustful of editors. </span>
      <span id="f2059"> But it was not distrust that prevented him from submitting the &#34;Lyrics.&#34;  They were so beautiful to him that he was impelled to save them to share with Ruth in some glorious, far-off time when he would dare to read to her what he had written. </span>
      <span id="f2060"> Against that time he kept them with him, reading them aloud, going over them until he knew them by heart.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2061">He lived every moment of his waking hours, and he lived in his sleep, his subjective mind rioting through his five hours of surcease and combining the thoughts and events of the day into grotesque and impossible marvels. </span>
      <span id="f2062">In reality, he never rested, and a weaker body or a less firmly poised brain would have been prostrated in a general break-down. </span>
      <span id="f2063"> His late afternoon calls on Ruth were rarer now, for June was approaching, when she would take her degree and finish with the university. </span>
      <span id="f2064"> Bachelor of Arts!--when he thought of her degree, it seemed she fled beyond him faster than he could pursue.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2065">One afternoon a week she gave to him, and arriving late, he usually stayed for dinner and for music afterward. </span>
      <span id="f2066"> Those were his red-letter days. </span>
      <span id="f2067"> The atmosphere of the house, in such contrast with that in which he lived, and the mere nearness to her, sent him forth each time with a firmer grip on his resolve to climb the heights. </span>
      <span id="f2068"> In spite of the beauty in him, and the aching desire to create, it was for her that he struggled. </span>
      <span id="f2069"> He was a lover first and always. </span>
      <span id="f2070"> All other things he subordinated to love.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2071">Greater than his adventure in the world of thought was his love-adventure. </span>
      <span id="f2072"> The world itself was not so amazing because of the atoms and molecules that composed it according to the propulsions of irresistible force; what made it amazing was the fact that Ruth lived in it. </span>
      <span id="f2073"> She was the most amazing thing he had ever known, or dreamed, or guessed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2074">But he was oppressed always by her remoteness. </span>
      <span id="f2075"> She was so far from him, and he did not know how to approach her. </span>
      <span id="f2076"> He had been a success with girls and women in his own class; but he had never loved any of them, while he did love her, and besides, she was not merely of another class. </span>
      <span id="f2077">His very love elevated her above all classes. </span>
      <span id="f2078"> She was a being apart, so far apart that he did not know how to draw near to her as a lover should draw near. </span>
      <span id="f2079"> It was true, as he acquired knowledge and language, that he was drawing nearer, talking her speech, discovering ideas and delights in common; but this did not satisfy his lover&#39;s yearning. </span>
      <span id="f2080"> His lover&#39;s imagination had made her holy, too holy, too spiritualized, to have any kinship with him in the flesh. </span>
      <span id="f2081"> It was his own love that thrust her from him and made her seem impossible for him. </span>
      <span id="f2082"> Love itself denied him the one thing that it desired.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2083">And then, one day, without warning, the gulf between them was bridged for a moment, and thereafter, though the gulf remained, it was ever narrower. </span>
      <span id="f2084">They had been eating cherries--great, luscious, black cherries with a juice of the color of dark wine. </span>
      <span id="f2085"> And later, as she read aloud to him from &#34;The Princess,&#34; he chanced to notice the stain of the cherries on her lips. </span>
      <span id="f2086"> For the moment her divinity was shattered. </span>
      <span id="f2087"> She was clay, after all, mere clay, subject to the common law of clay as his clay was subject, or anybody&#39;s clay. </span>
      <span id="f2088"> Her lips were flesh like his, and cherries dyed them as cherries dyed his. </span>
      <span id="f2089"> And if so with her lips, then was it so with all of her. </span>
      <span id="f2090"> She was woman, all woman, just like any woman. </span>
      <span id="f2091"> It came upon him abruptly. </span>
      <span id="f2092"> It was a revelation that stunned him. </span>
      <span id="f2093"> It was as if he had seen the sun fall out of the sky, or had seen worshipped purity polluted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2094">Then he realized the significance of it, and his heart began pounding and challenging him to play the lover with this woman who was not a spirit from other worlds but a mere woman with lips a cherry could stain. </span>
      <span id="f2095"> He trembled at the audacity of his thought; but all his soul was singing, and reason, in a triumphant paean, assured him he was right. </span>
      <span id="f2096"> Something of this change in him must have reached her, for she paused from her reading, looked up at him, and smiled. </span>
      <span id="f2097"> His eyes dropped from her blue eyes to her lips, and the sight of the stain maddened him. </span>
      <span id="f2098"> His arms all but flashed out to her and around her, in the way of his old careless life. </span>
      <span id="f2099"> She seemed to lean toward him, to wait, and all his will fought to hold him back.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2100">&#34;You were not following a word,&#34; she pouted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2101">Then she laughed at him, delighting in his confusion, and as he looked into her frank eyes and knew that she had divined nothing of what he felt, he became abashed. </span>
      <span id="f2102"> He had indeed in thought dared too far. </span>
      <span id="f2103"> Of all the women he had known there was no woman who would not have guessed--save her. </span>
      <span id="f2104"> And she had not guessed. </span>
      <span id="f2105"> There was the difference. </span>
      <span id="f2106"> She was different. </span>
      <span id="f2107"> He was appalled by his own grossness, awed by her clear innocence, and he gazed again at her across the gulf. </span>
      <span id="f2108"> The bridge had broken down.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2109">But still the incident had brought him nearer. </span>
      <span id="f2110"> The memory of it persisted, and in the moments when he was most cast down, he dwelt upon it eagerly. </span>
      <span id="f2111"> The gulf was never again so wide. </span>
      <span id="f2112"> He had accomplished a distance vastly greater than a bachelorship of arts, or a dozen bachelorships. </span>
      <span id="f2113"> She was pure, it was true, as he had never dreamed of purity; but cherries stained her lips. </span>
      <span id="f2114"> She was subject to the laws of the universe just as inexorably as he was. </span>
      <span id="f2115"> She had to eat to live, and when she got her feet wet, she caught cold. </span>
      <span id="f2116"> But that was not the point. </span>
      <span id="f2117">If she could feel hunger and thirst, and heat and cold, then could she feel love--and love for a man. </span>
      <span id="f2118"> Well, he was a man. </span>
      <span id="f2119"> And why could he not be the man? </span>
      <span id="f2120"> &#34;It&#39;s up to me to make good,&#34; he would murmur fervently. </span>
      <span id="f2121"> &#34;I will be _the_ man. </span>
      <span id="f2122"> I will make myself _the_ man. </span>
      <span id="f2123"> I will make good.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>