<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f2124">CHAPTER XII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f2125">Early one evening, struggling with a sonnet that twisted all awry the beauty and thought that trailed in glow and vapor through his brain, Martin was called to the telephone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2126">&#34;It&#39;s a lady&#39;s voice, a fine lady&#39;s,&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2127">Higginbotham, who had called him, jeered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2128">Martin went to the telephone in the corner of the room, and felt a wave of warmth rush through him as he heard Ruth&#39;s voice. </span>
      <span id="f2129"> In his battle with the sonnet he had forgotten her existence, and at the sound of her voice his love for her smote him like a sudden blow. </span>
      <span id="f2130"> And such a voice!--delicate and sweet, like a strain of music heard far off and faint, or, better, like a bell of silver, a perfect tone, crystal-pure. </span>
      <span id="f2131">No mere woman had a voice like that. </span>
      <span id="f2132"> There was something celestial about it, and it came from other worlds. </span>
      <span id="f2133"> He could scarcely hear what it said, so ravished was he, though he controlled his face, for he knew that Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2134">Higginbotham&#39;s ferret eyes were fixed upon him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2135">It was not much that Ruth wanted to say--merely that Norman had been going to take her to a lecture that night, but that he had a headache, and she was so disappointed, and she had the tickets, and that if he had no other engagement, would he be good enough to take her?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2136">Would he! </span>
      <span id="f2137"> He fought to suppress the eagerness in his voice. </span>
      <span id="f2138"> It was amazing. </span>
      <span id="f2139"> He had always seen her in her own house. </span>
      <span id="f2140"> And he had never dared to ask her to go anywhere with him. </span>
      <span id="f2141"> Quite irrelevantly, still at the telephone and talking with her, he felt an overpowering desire to die for her, and visions of heroic sacrifice shaped and dissolved in his whirling brain. </span>
      <span id="f2142"> He loved her so much, so terribly, so hopelessly. </span>
      <span id="f2143"> In that moment of mad happiness that she should go out with him, go to a lecture with him--with him, Martin Eden--she soared so far above him that there seemed nothing else for him to do than die for her. </span>
      <span id="f2144"> It was the only fit way in which he could express the tremendous and lofty emotion he felt for her. </span>
      <span id="f2145"> It was the sublime abnegation of true love that comes to all lovers, and it came to him there, at the telephone, in a whirlwind of fire and glory; and to die for her, he felt, was to have lived and loved well. </span>
      <span id="f2146"> And he was only twenty-one, and he had never been in love before.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2147">His hand trembled as he hung up the receiver, and he was weak from the organ which had stirred him. </span>
      <span id="f2148"> His eyes were shining like an angel&#39;s, and his face was transfigured, purged of all earthly dross, and pure and holy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2149">&#34;Makin&#39; dates outside, eh?&#34; his brother-in-law sneered. </span>
      <span id="f2150"> &#34;You know what that means. </span>
      <span id="f2151"> You&#39;ll be in the police court yet.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2152">But Martin could not come down from the height. </span>
      <span id="f2153"> Not even the bestiality of the allusion could bring him back to earth. </span>
      <span id="f2154"> Anger and hurt were beneath him. </span>
      <span id="f2155"> He had seen a great vision and was as a god, and he could feel only profound and awful pity for this maggot of a man. </span>
      <span id="f2156"> He did not look at him, and though his eyes passed over him, he did not see him; and as in a dream he passed out of the room to dress. </span>
      <span id="f2157"> It was not until he had reached his own room and was tying his necktie that he became aware of a sound that lingered unpleasantly in his ears. </span>
      <span id="f2158"> On investigating this sound he identified it as the final snort of Bernard Higginbotham, which somehow had not penetrated to his brain before.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2159">As Ruth&#39;s front door closed behind them and he came down the steps with her, he found himself greatly perturbed. </span>
      <span id="f2160"> It was not unalloyed bliss, taking her to the lecture. </span>
      <span id="f2161"> He did not know what he ought to do. </span>
      <span id="f2162"> He had seen, on the streets, with persons of her class, that the women took the men&#39;s arms. </span>
      <span id="f2163"> But then, again, he had seen them when they didn&#39;t; and he wondered if it was only in the evening that arms were taken, or only between husbands and wives and relatives.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2164">Just before he reached the sidewalk, he remembered Minnie. </span>
      <span id="f2165"> Minnie had always been a stickler. </span>
      <span id="f2166"> She had called him down the second time she walked out with him, because he had gone along on the inside, and she had laid the law down to him that a gentleman always walked on the outside--when he was with a lady. </span>
      <span id="f2167"> And Minnie had made a practice of kicking his heels, whenever they crossed from one side of the street to the other, to remind him to get over on the outside. </span>
      <span id="f2168"> He wondered where she had got that item of etiquette, and whether it had filtered down from above and was all right.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2169">It wouldn&#39;t do any harm to try it, he decided, by the time they had reached the sidewalk; and he swung behind Ruth and took up his station on the outside. </span>
      <span id="f2170"> Then the other problem presented itself. </span>
      <span id="f2171"> Should he offer her his arm? </span>
      <span id="f2172"> He had never offered anybody his arm in his life. </span>
      <span id="f2173"> The girls he had known never took the fellows&#39; arms. </span>
      <span id="f2174"> For the first several times they walked freely, side by side, and after that it was arms around the waists, and heads against the fellows&#39; shoulders where the streets were unlighted. </span>
      <span id="f2175"> But this was different. </span>
      <span id="f2176"> She wasn&#39;t that kind of a girl. </span>
      <span id="f2177">He must do something.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2178">He crooked the arm next to her--crooked it very slightly and with secret tentativeness, not invitingly, but just casually, as though he was accustomed to walk that way. </span>
      <span id="f2179"> And then the wonderful thing happened. </span>
      <span id="f2180"> He felt her hand upon his arm. </span>
      <span id="f2181"> Delicious thrills ran through him at the contact, and for a few sweet moments it seemed that he had left the solid earth and was flying with her through the air. </span>
      <span id="f2182"> But he was soon back again, perturbed by a new complication. </span>
      <span id="f2183"> They were crossing the street. </span>
      <span id="f2184">This would put him on the inside. </span>
      <span id="f2185"> He should be on the outside. </span>
      <span id="f2186"> Should he therefore drop her arm and change over? </span>
      <span id="f2187"> And if he did so, would he have to repeat the manoeuvre the next time? </span>
      <span id="f2188"> And the next? </span>
      <span id="f2189"> There was something wrong about it, and he resolved not to caper about and play the fool. </span>
      <span id="f2190"> Yet he was not satisfied with his conclusion, and when he found himself on the inside, he talked quickly and earnestly, making a show of being carried away by what he was saying, so that, in case he was wrong in not changing sides, his enthusiasm would seem the cause for his carelessness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2191">As they crossed Broadway, he came face to face with a new problem. </span>
      <span id="f2192"> In the blaze of the electric lights, he saw Lizzie Connolly and her giggly friend. </span>
      <span id="f2193"> Only for an instant he hesitated, then his hand went up and his hat came off. </span>
      <span id="f2194"> He could not be disloyal to his kind, and it was to more than Lizzie Connolly that his hat was lifted. </span>
      <span id="f2195"> She nodded and looked at him boldly, not with soft and gentle eyes like Ruth&#39;s, but with eyes that were handsome and hard, and that swept on past him to Ruth and itemized her face and dress and station. </span>
      <span id="f2196"> And he was aware that Ruth looked, too, with quick eyes that were timid and mild as a dove&#39;s, but which saw, in a look that was a flutter on and past, the working-class girl in her cheap finery and under the strange hat that all working-class girls were wearing just then.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2197">&#34;What a pretty girl!&#34; Ruth said a moment later.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2198">Martin could have blessed her, though he said:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2199">&#34;I don&#39;t know. </span>
      <span id="f2200"> I guess it&#39;s all a matter of personal taste, but she doesn&#39;t strike me as being particularly pretty.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2201">&#34;Why, there isn&#39;t one woman in ten thousand with features as regular as hers. </span>
      <span id="f2202"> They are splendid. </span>
      <span id="f2203"> Her face is as clear-cut as a cameo. </span>
      <span id="f2204"> And her eyes are beautiful.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2205">&#34;Do you think so?&#34; Martin queried absently, for to him there was only one beautiful woman in the world, and she was beside him, her hand upon his arm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2206">&#34;Do I think so? </span>
      <span id="f2207"> If that girl had proper opportunity to dress, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2208">Eden, and if she were taught how to carry herself, you would be fairly dazzled by her, and so would all men.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2209">&#34;She would have to be taught how to speak,&#34; he commented, &#34;or else most of the men wouldn&#39;t understand her. </span>
      <span id="f2210"> I&#39;m sure you couldn&#39;t understand a quarter of what she said if she just spoke naturally.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2211">&#34;Nonsense! </span>
      <span id="f2212"> You are as bad as Arthur when you try to make your point.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2213">&#34;You forget how I talked when you first met me. </span>
      <span id="f2214"> I have learned a new language since then. </span>
      <span id="f2215"> Before that time I talked as that girl talks. </span>
      <span id="f2216"> Now I can manage to make myself understood sufficiently in your language to explain that you do not know that other girl&#39;s language. </span>
      <span id="f2217"> And do you know why she carries herself the way she does? </span>
      <span id="f2218"> I think about such things now, though I never used to think about them, and I am beginning to understand--much.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2219">&#34;But why does she?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2220">&#34;She has worked long hours for years at machines. </span>
      <span id="f2221"> When one&#39;s body is young, it is very pliable, and hard work will mould it like putty according to the nature of the work. </span>
      <span id="f2222"> I can tell at a glance the trades of many workingmen I meet on the street. </span>
      <span id="f2223"> Look at me. </span>
      <span id="f2224"> Why am I rolling all about the shop? </span>
      <span id="f2225"> Because of the years I put in on the sea. </span>
      <span id="f2226"> If I&#39;d put in the same years cow-punching, with my body young and pliable, I wouldn&#39;t be rolling now, but I&#39;d be bow-legged. </span>
      <span id="f2227"> And so with that girl. </span>
      <span id="f2228">You noticed that her eyes were what I might call hard. </span>
      <span id="f2229"> She has never been sheltered. </span>
      <span id="f2230"> She has had to take care of herself, and a young girl can&#39;t take care of herself and keep her eyes soft and gentle like--like yours, for example.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2231">&#34;I think you are right,&#34; Ruth said in a low voice. </span>
      <span id="f2232"> &#34;And it is too bad. </span>
      <span id="f2233">She is such a pretty girl.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2234">He looked at her and saw her eyes luminous with pity. </span>
      <span id="f2235"> And then he remembered that he loved her and was lost in amazement at his fortune that permitted him to love her and to take her on his arm to a lecture.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2236">Who are you, Martin Eden? </span>
      <span id="f2237">he demanded of himself in the looking-glass, that night when he got back to his room. </span>
      <span id="f2238"> He gazed at himself long and curiously. </span>
      <span id="f2239"> Who are you? </span>
      <span id="f2240"> What are you? </span>
      <span id="f2241"> Where do you belong? </span>
      <span id="f2242"> You belong by rights to girls like Lizzie Connolly. </span>
      <span id="f2243"> You belong with the legions of toil, with all that is low, and vulgar, and unbeautiful. </span>
      <span id="f2244"> You belong with the oxen and the drudges, in dirty surroundings among smells and stenches. </span>
      <span id="f2245"> There are the stale vegetables now. </span>
      <span id="f2246"> Those potatoes are rotting. </span>
      <span id="f2247"> Smell them, damn you, smell them. </span>
      <span id="f2248"> And yet you dare to open the books, to listen to beautiful music, to learn to love beautiful paintings, to speak good English, to think thoughts that none of your own kind thinks, to tear yourself away from the oxen and the Lizzie Connollys and to love a pale spirit of a woman who is a million miles beyond you and who lives in the stars! </span>
      <span id="f2249"> Who are you? </span>
      <span id="f2250">and what are you? </span>
      <span id="f2251">damn you! </span>
      <span id="f2252"> And are you going to make good?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2253">He shook his fist at himself in the glass, and sat down on the edge of the bed to dream for a space with wide eyes. </span>
      <span id="f2254"> Then he got out note-book and algebra and lost himself in quadratic equations, while the hours slipped by, and the stars dimmed, and the gray of dawn flooded against his window.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>