<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f2255">CHAPTER XIII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f2256">It was the knot of wordy socialists and working-class philosophers that held forth in the City Hall Park on warm afternoons that was responsible for the great discovery. </span>
      <span id="f2257"> Once or twice in the month, while riding through the park on his way to the library, Martin dismounted from his wheel and listened to the arguments, and each time he tore himself away reluctantly. </span>
      <span id="f2258"> The tone of discussion was much lower than at Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2259">Morse&#39;s table. </span>
      <span id="f2260"> The men were not grave and dignified. </span>
      <span id="f2261"> They lost their tempers easily and called one another names, while oaths and obscene allusions were frequent on their lips. </span>
      <span id="f2262"> Once or twice he had seen them come to blows. </span>
      <span id="f2263"> And yet, he knew not why, there seemed something vital about the stuff of these men&#39;s thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f2264"> Their logomachy was far more stimulating to his intellect than the reserved and quiet dogmatism of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2265">Morse. </span>
      <span id="f2266">These men, who slaughtered English, gesticulated like lunatics, and fought one another&#39;s ideas with primitive anger, seemed somehow to be more alive than Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2267">Morse and his crony, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2268">Butler.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2269">Martin had heard Herbert Spencer quoted several times in the park, but one afternoon a disciple of Spencer&#39;s appeared, a seedy tramp with a dirty coat buttoned tightly at the throat to conceal the absence of a shirt. </span>
      <span id="f2270"> Battle royal was waged, amid the smoking of many cigarettes and the expectoration of much tobacco-juice, wherein the tramp successfully held his own, even when a socialist workman sneered, &#34;There is no god but the Unknowable, and Herbert Spencer is his prophet.&#34;  Martin was puzzled as to what the discussion was about, but when he rode on to the library he carried with him a new-born interest in Herbert Spencer, and because of the frequency with which the tramp had mentioned &#34;First Principles,&#34; Martin drew out that volume.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2271">So the great discovery began. </span>
      <span id="f2272"> Once before he had tried Spencer, and choosing the &#34;Principles of Psychology&#34; to begin with, he had failed as abjectly as he had failed with Madam Blavatsky. </span>
      <span id="f2273"> There had been no understanding the book, and he had returned it unread. </span>
      <span id="f2274"> But this night, after algebra and physics, and an attempt at a sonnet, he got into bed and opened &#34;First Principles.&#34;  Morning found him still reading. </span>
      <span id="f2275"> It was impossible for him to sleep. </span>
      <span id="f2276"> Nor did he write that day. </span>
      <span id="f2277"> He lay on the bed till his body grew tired, when he tried the hard floor, reading on his back, the book held in the air above him, or changing from side to side. </span>
      <span id="f2278"> He slept that night, and did his writing next morning, and then the book tempted him and he fell, reading all afternoon, oblivious to everything and oblivious to the fact that that was the afternoon Ruth gave to him. </span>
      <span id="f2279"> His first consciousness of the immediate world about him was when Bernard Higginbotham jerked open the door and demanded to know if he thought they were running a restaurant.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2280">Martin Eden had been mastered by curiosity all his days. </span>
      <span id="f2281"> He wanted to know, and it was this desire that had sent him adventuring over the world. </span>
      <span id="f2282"> But he was now learning from Spencer that he never had known, and that he never could have known had he continued his sailing and wandering forever. </span>
      <span id="f2283"> He had merely skimmed over the surface of things, observing detached phenomena, accumulating fragments of facts, making superficial little generalizations--and all and everything quite unrelated in a capricious and disorderly world of whim and chance. </span>
      <span id="f2284"> The mechanism of the flight of birds he had watched and reasoned about with understanding; but it had never entered his head to try to explain the process whereby birds, as organic flying mechanisms, had been developed. </span>
      <span id="f2285"> He had never dreamed there was such a process. </span>
      <span id="f2286"> That birds should have come to be, was unguessed. </span>
      <span id="f2287"> They always had been. </span>
      <span id="f2288"> They just happened.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2289">And as it was with birds, so had it been with everything. </span>
      <span id="f2290"> His ignorant and unprepared attempts at philosophy had been fruitless. </span>
      <span id="f2291"> The medieval metaphysics of Kant had given him the key to nothing, and had served the sole purpose of making him doubt his own intellectual powers. </span>
      <span id="f2292"> In similar manner his attempt to study evolution had been confined to a hopelessly technical volume by Romanes. </span>
      <span id="f2293"> He had understood nothing, and the only idea he had gathered was that evolution was a dry-as-dust theory, of a lot of little men possessed of huge and unintelligible vocabularies. </span>
      <span id="f2294"> And now he learned that evolution was no mere theory but an accepted process of development; that scientists no longer disagreed about it, their only differences being over the method of evolution.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2295">And here was the man Spencer, organizing all knowledge for him, reducing everything to unity, elaborating ultimate realities, and presenting to his startled gaze a universe so concrete of realization that it was like the model of a ship such as sailors make and put into glass bottles. </span>
      <span id="f2296">There was no caprice, no chance. </span>
      <span id="f2297"> All was law. </span>
      <span id="f2298"> It was in obedience to law that the bird flew, and it was in obedience to the same law that fermenting slime had writhed and squirmed and put out legs and wings and become a bird.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2299">Martin had ascended from pitch to pitch of intellectual living, and here he was at a higher pitch than ever. </span>
      <span id="f2300"> All the hidden things were laying their secrets bare. </span>
      <span id="f2301"> He was drunken with comprehension. </span>
      <span id="f2302"> At night, asleep, he lived with the gods in colossal nightmare; and awake, in the day, he went around like a somnambulist, with absent stare, gazing upon the world he had just discovered. </span>
      <span id="f2303"> At table he failed to hear the conversation about petty and ignoble things, his eager mind seeking out and following cause and effect in everything before him. </span>
      <span id="f2304"> In the meat on the platter he saw the shining sun and traced its energy back through all its transformations to its source a hundred million miles away, or traced its energy ahead to the moving muscles in his arms that enabled him to cut the meat, and to the brain wherewith he willed the muscles to move to cut the meat, until, with inward gaze, he saw the same sun shining in his brain. </span>
      <span id="f2305"> He was entranced by illumination, and did not hear the &#34;Bughouse,&#34; whispered by Jim, nor see the anxiety on his sister&#39;s face, nor notice the rotary motion of Bernard Higginbotham&#39;s finger, whereby he imparted the suggestion of wheels revolving in his brother-in-law&#39;s head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2306">What, in a way, most profoundly impressed Martin, was the correlation of knowledge--of all knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f2307"> He had been curious to know things, and whatever he acquired he had filed away in separate memory compartments in his brain. </span>
      <span id="f2308"> Thus, on the subject of sailing he had an immense store. </span>
      <span id="f2309"> On the subject of woman he had a fairly large store. </span>
      <span id="f2310"> But these two subjects had been unrelated. </span>
      <span id="f2311"> Between the two memory compartments there had been no connection. </span>
      <span id="f2312"> That, in the fabric of knowledge, there should be any connection whatever between a woman with hysterics and a schooner carrying a weather-helm or heaving to in a gale, would have struck him as ridiculous and impossible. </span>
      <span id="f2313"> But Herbert Spencer had shown him not only that it was not ridiculous, but that it was impossible for there to be no connection. </span>
      <span id="f2314"> All things were related to all other things from the farthermost star in the wastes of space to the myriads of atoms in the grain of sand under one&#39;s foot. </span>
      <span id="f2315"> This new concept was a perpetual amazement to Martin, and he found himself engaged continually in tracing the relationship between all things under the sun and on the other side of the sun. </span>
      <span id="f2316"> He drew up lists of the most incongruous things and was unhappy until he succeeded in establishing kinship between them all--kinship between love, poetry, earthquake, fire, rattlesnakes, rainbows, precious gems, monstrosities, sunsets, the roaring of lions, illuminating gas, cannibalism, beauty, murder, lovers, fulcrums, and tobacco. </span>
      <span id="f2317"> Thus, he unified the universe and held it up and looked at it, or wandered through its byways and alleys and jungles, not as a terrified traveller in the thick of mysteries seeking an unknown goal, but observing and charting and becoming familiar with all there was to know. </span>
      <span id="f2318">And the more he knew, the more passionately he admired the universe, and life, and his own life in the midst of it all.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2319">&#34;You fool!&#34; he cried at his image in the looking-glass. </span>
      <span id="f2320"> &#34;You wanted to write, and you tried to write, and you had nothing in you to write about. </span>
      <span id="f2321">What did you have in you?--some childish notions, a few half-baked sentiments, a lot of undigested beauty, a great black mass of ignorance, a heart filled to bursting with love, and an ambition as big as your love and as futile as your ignorance. </span>
      <span id="f2322"> And you wanted to write! </span>
      <span id="f2323"> Why, you&#39;re just on the edge of beginning to get something in you to write about. </span>
      <span id="f2324"> You wanted to create beauty, but how could you when you knew nothing about the nature of beauty? </span>
      <span id="f2325"> You wanted to write about life when you knew nothing of the essential characteristics of life. </span>
      <span id="f2326"> You wanted to write about the world and the scheme of existence when the world was a Chinese puzzle to you and all that you could have written would have been about what you did not know of the scheme of existence. </span>
      <span id="f2327"> But cheer up, Martin, my boy. </span>
      <span id="f2328"> You&#39;ll write yet. </span>
      <span id="f2329"> You know a little, a very little, and you&#39;re on the right road now to know more. </span>
      <span id="f2330"> Some day, if you&#39;re lucky, you may come pretty close to knowing all that may be known. </span>
      <span id="f2331"> Then you will write.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2332">He brought his great discovery to Ruth, sharing with her all his joy and wonder in it. </span>
      <span id="f2333"> But she did not seem to be so enthusiastic over it. </span>
      <span id="f2334"> She tacitly accepted it and, in a way, seemed aware of it from her own studies. </span>
      <span id="f2335"> It did not stir her deeply, as it did him, and he would have been surprised had he not reasoned it out that it was not new and fresh to her as it was to him. </span>
      <span id="f2336"> Arthur and Norman, he found, believed in evolution and had read Spencer, though it did not seem to have made any vital impression upon them, while the young fellow with the glasses and the mop of hair, Will Olney, sneered disagreeably at Spencer and repeated the epigram, &#34;There is no god but the Unknowable, and Herbert Spencer is his prophet.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2337">But Martin forgave him the sneer, for he had begun to discover that Olney was not in love with Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f2338"> Later, he was dumfounded to learn from various little happenings not only that Olney did not care for Ruth, but that he had a positive dislike for her. </span>
      <span id="f2339"> Martin could not understand this. </span>
      <span id="f2340"> It was a bit of phenomena that he could not correlate with all the rest of the phenomena in the universe. </span>
      <span id="f2341"> But nevertheless he felt sorry for the young fellow because of the great lack in his nature that prevented him from a proper appreciation of Ruth&#39;s fineness and beauty. </span>
      <span id="f2342">They rode out into the hills several Sundays on their wheels, and Martin had ample opportunity to observe the armed truce that existed between Ruth and Olney. </span>
      <span id="f2343"> The latter chummed with Norman, throwing Arthur and Martin into company with Ruth, for which Martin was duly grateful.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2344">Those Sundays were great days for Martin, greatest because he was with Ruth, and great, also, because they were putting him more on a par with the young men of her class. </span>
      <span id="f2345"> In spite of their long years of disciplined education, he was finding himself their intellectual equal, and the hours spent with them in conversation was so much practice for him in the use of the grammar he had studied so hard. </span>
      <span id="f2346"> He had abandoned the etiquette books, falling back upon observation to show him the right things to do. </span>
      <span id="f2347">Except when carried away by his enthusiasm, he was always on guard, keenly watchful of their actions and learning their little courtesies and refinements of conduct.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2348">The fact that Spencer was very little read was for some time a source of surprise to Martin. </span>
      <span id="f2349"> &#34;Herbert Spencer,&#34; said the man at the desk in the library, &#34;oh, yes, a great mind.&#34;  But the man did not seem to know anything of the content of that great mind. </span>
      <span id="f2350"> One evening, at dinner, when Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2351">Butler was there, Martin turned the conversation upon Spencer. </span>
      <span id="f2352"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2353">Morse bitterly arraigned the English philosopher&#39;s agnosticism, but confessed that he had not read &#34;First Principles&#34;; while Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2354">Butler stated that he had no patience with Spencer, had never read a line of him, and had managed to get along quite well without him. </span>
      <span id="f2355"> Doubts arose in Martin&#39;s mind, and had he been less strongly individual he would have accepted the general opinion and given Herbert Spencer up. </span>
      <span id="f2356"> As it was, he found Spencer&#39;s explanation of things convincing; and, as he phrased it to himself, to give up Spencer would be equivalent to a navigator throwing the compass and chronometer overboard. </span>
      <span id="f2357"> So Martin went on into a thorough study of evolution, mastering more and more the subject himself, and being convinced by the corroborative testimony of a thousand independent writers. </span>
      <span id="f2358"> The more he studied, the more vistas he caught of fields of knowledge yet unexplored, and the regret that days were only twenty-four hours long became a chronic complaint with him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2359">One day, because the days were so short, he decided to give up algebra and geometry. </span>
      <span id="f2360"> Trigonometry he had not even attempted. </span>
      <span id="f2361"> Then he cut chemistry from his study-list, retaining only physics.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2362">&#34;I am not a specialist,&#34; he said, in defence, to Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f2363"> &#34;Nor am I going to try to be a specialist. </span>
      <span id="f2364"> There are too many special fields for any one man, in a whole lifetime, to master a tithe of them. </span>
      <span id="f2365"> I must pursue general knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f2366"> When I need the work of specialists, I shall refer to their books.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2367">&#34;But that is not like having the knowledge yourself,&#34; she protested.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2368">&#34;But it is unnecessary to have it. </span>
      <span id="f2369"> We profit from the work of the specialists. </span>
      <span id="f2370"> That&#39;s what they are for. </span>
      <span id="f2371"> When I came in, I noticed the chimney-sweeps at work. </span>
      <span id="f2372"> They&#39;re specialists, and when they get done, you will enjoy clean chimneys without knowing anything about the construction of chimneys.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2373">&#34;That&#39;s far-fetched, I am afraid.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2374">She looked at him curiously, and he felt a reproach in her gaze and manner. </span>
      <span id="f2375"> But he was convinced of the rightness of his position.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2376">&#34;All thinkers on general subjects, the greatest minds in the world, in fact, rely on the specialists. </span>
      <span id="f2377"> Herbert Spencer did that. </span>
      <span id="f2378"> He generalized upon the findings of thousands of investigators. </span>
      <span id="f2379"> He would have had to live a thousand lives in order to do it all himself. </span>
      <span id="f2380"> And so with Darwin. </span>
      <span id="f2381">He took advantage of all that had been learned by the florists and cattle- breeders.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2382">&#34;You&#39;re right, Martin,&#34; Olney said. </span>
      <span id="f2383"> &#34;You know what you&#39;re after, and Ruth doesn&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f2384"> She doesn&#39;t know what she is after for herself even.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2385">&#34;--Oh, yes,&#34; Olney rushed on, heading off her objection, &#34;I know you call it general culture. </span>
      <span id="f2386"> But it doesn&#39;t matter what you study if you want general culture. </span>
      <span id="f2387"> You can study French, or you can study German, or cut them both out and study Esperanto, you&#39;ll get the culture tone just the same. </span>
      <span id="f2388"> You can study Greek or Latin, too, for the same purpose, though it will never be any use to you. </span>
      <span id="f2389"> It will be culture, though. </span>
      <span id="f2390"> Why, Ruth studied Saxon, became clever in it,--that was two years ago,--and all that she remembers of it now is &#39;Whan that sweet Aprile with his schowers soote&#39;--isn&#39;t that the way it goes?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2391">&#34;But it&#39;s given you the culture tone just the same,&#34; he laughed, again heading her off. </span>
      <span id="f2392"> &#34;I know. </span>
      <span id="f2393"> We were in the same classes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2394">&#34;But you speak of culture as if it should be a means to something,&#34; Ruth cried out. </span>
      <span id="f2395"> Her eyes were flashing, and in her cheeks were two spots of color. </span>
      <span id="f2396"> &#34;Culture is the end in itself.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2397">&#34;But that is not what Martin wants.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2398">&#34;How do you know?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2399">&#34;What do you want, Martin?&#34; Olney demanded, turning squarely upon him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2400">Martin felt very uncomfortable, and looked entreaty at Ruth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2401">&#34;Yes, what do you want?&#34; Ruth asked. </span>
      <span id="f2402"> &#34;That will settle it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2403">&#34;Yes, of course, I want culture,&#34; Martin faltered. </span>
      <span id="f2404"> &#34;I love beauty, and culture will give me a finer and keener appreciation of beauty.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2405">She nodded her head and looked triumph.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2406">&#34;Rot, and you know it,&#34; was Olney&#39;s comment. </span>
      <span id="f2407"> &#34;Martin&#39;s after career, not culture. </span>
      <span id="f2408"> It just happens that culture, in his case, is incidental to career. </span>
      <span id="f2409"> If he wanted to be a chemist, culture would be unnecessary. </span>
      <span id="f2410">Martin wants to write, but he&#39;s afraid to say so because it will put you in the wrong.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2411">&#34;And why does Martin want to write?&#34; he went on. </span>
      <span id="f2412"> &#34;Because he isn&#39;t rolling in wealth. </span>
      <span id="f2413"> Why do you fill your head with Saxon and general culture? </span>
      <span id="f2414"> Because you don&#39;t have to make your way in the world. </span>
      <span id="f2415"> Your father sees to that. </span>
      <span id="f2416"> He buys your clothes for you, and all the rest. </span>
      <span id="f2417">What rotten good is our education, yours and mine and Arthur&#39;s and Norman&#39;s? </span>
      <span id="f2418"> We&#39;re soaked in general culture, and if our daddies went broke to-day, we&#39;d be falling down to-morrow on teachers&#39; examinations. </span>
      <span id="f2419"> The best job you could get, Ruth, would be a country school or music teacher in a girls&#39; boarding-school.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2420">&#34;And pray what would you do?&#34; she asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2421">&#34;Not a blessed thing. </span>
      <span id="f2422"> I could earn a dollar and a half a day, common labor, and I might get in as instructor in Hanley&#39;s cramming joint--I say might, mind you, and I might be chucked out at the end of the week for sheer inability.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2423">Martin followed the discussion closely, and while he was convinced that Olney was right, he resented the rather cavalier treatment he accorded Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f2424"> A new conception of love formed in his mind as he listened. </span>
      <span id="f2425"> Reason had nothing to do with love. </span>
      <span id="f2426"> It mattered not whether the woman he loved reasoned correctly or incorrectly. </span>
      <span id="f2427"> Love was above reason. </span>
      <span id="f2428"> If it just happened that she did not fully appreciate his necessity for a career, that did not make her a bit less lovable. </span>
      <span id="f2429"> She was all lovable, and what she thought had nothing to do with her lovableness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2430">&#34;What&#39;s that?&#34; he replied to a question from Olney that broke in upon his train of thought.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2431">&#34;I was saying that I hoped you wouldn&#39;t be fool enough to tackle Latin.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2432">&#34;But Latin is more than culture,&#34; Ruth broke in. </span>
      <span id="f2433"> &#34;It is equipment.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2434">&#34;Well, are you going to tackle it?&#34; Olney persisted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2435">Martin was sore beset. </span>
      <span id="f2436"> He could see that Ruth was hanging eagerly upon his answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2437">&#34;I am afraid I won&#39;t have time,&#34; he said finally. </span>
      <span id="f2438"> &#34;I&#39;d like to, but I won&#39;t have time.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2439">&#34;You see, Martin&#39;s not seeking culture,&#34; Olney exulted. </span>
      <span id="f2440"> &#34;He&#39;s trying to get somewhere, to do something.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2441">&#34;Oh, but it&#39;s mental training. </span>
      <span id="f2442"> It&#39;s mind discipline. </span>
      <span id="f2443"> It&#39;s what makes disciplined minds.&#34;  Ruth looked expectantly at Martin, as if waiting for him to change his judgment. </span>
      <span id="f2444"> &#34;You know, the foot-ball players have to train before the big game. </span>
      <span id="f2445"> And that is what Latin does for the thinker. </span>
      <span id="f2446">It trains.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2447">&#34;Rot and bosh! </span>
      <span id="f2448"> That&#39;s what they told us when we were kids. </span>
      <span id="f2449"> But there is one thing they didn&#39;t tell us then. </span>
      <span id="f2450"> They let us find it out for ourselves afterwards.&#34;  Olney paused for effect, then added, &#34;And what they didn&#39;t tell us was that every gentleman should have studied Latin, but that no gentleman should know Latin.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2451">&#34;Now that&#39;s unfair,&#34; Ruth cried. </span>
      <span id="f2452"> &#34;I knew you were turning the conversation just in order to get off something.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2453">&#34;It&#39;s clever all right,&#34; was the retort, &#34;but it&#39;s fair, too. </span>
      <span id="f2454"> The only men who know their Latin are the apothecaries, the lawyers, and the Latin professors. </span>
      <span id="f2455"> And if Martin wants to be one of them, I miss my guess. </span>
      <span id="f2456"> But what&#39;s all that got to do with Herbert Spencer anyway? </span>
      <span id="f2457"> Martin&#39;s just discovered Spencer, and he&#39;s wild over him. </span>
      <span id="f2458"> Why? </span>
      <span id="f2459"> Because Spencer is taking him somewhere. </span>
      <span id="f2460"> Spencer couldn&#39;t take me anywhere, nor you. </span>
      <span id="f2461"> We haven&#39;t got anywhere to go. </span>
      <span id="f2462"> You&#39;ll get married some day, and I&#39;ll have nothing to do but keep track of the lawyers and business agents who will take care of the money my father&#39;s going to leave me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2463">Onley got up to go, but turned at the door and delivered a parting shot.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2464">&#34;You leave Martin alone, Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f2465"> He knows what&#39;s best for himself. </span>
      <span id="f2466"> Look at what he&#39;s done already. </span>
      <span id="f2467"> He makes me sick sometimes, sick and ashamed of myself. </span>
      <span id="f2468"> He knows more now about the world, and life, and man&#39;s place, and all the rest, than Arthur, or Norman, or I, or you, too, for that matter, and in spite of all our Latin, and French, and Saxon, and culture.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2469">&#34;But Ruth is my teacher,&#34; Martin answered chivalrously. </span>
      <span id="f2470"> &#34;She is responsible for what little I have learned.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2471">&#34;Rats!&#34;  Olney looked at Ruth, and his expression was malicious. </span>
      <span id="f2472"> &#34;I suppose you&#39;ll be telling me next that you read Spencer on her recommendation--only you didn&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f2473"> And she doesn&#39;t know anything more about Darwin and evolution than I do about King Solomon&#39;s mines. </span>
      <span id="f2474"> What&#39;s that jawbreaker definition about something or other, of Spencer&#39;s, that you sprang on us the other day--that indefinite, incoherent homogeneity thing? </span>
      <span id="f2475"> Spring it on her, and see if she understands a word of it. </span>
      <span id="f2476"> That isn&#39;t culture, you see. </span>
      <span id="f2477"> Well, tra la, and if you tackle Latin, Martin, I won&#39;t have any respect for you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2478">And all the while, interested in the discussion, Martin had been aware of an irk in it as well. </span>
      <span id="f2479"> It was about studies and lessons, dealing with the rudiments of knowledge, and the schoolboyish tone of it conflicted with the big things that were stirring in him--with the grip upon life that was even then crooking his fingers like eagle&#39;s talons, with the cosmic thrills that made him ache, and with the inchoate consciousness of mastery of it all. </span>
      <span id="f2480"> He likened himself to a poet, wrecked on the shores of a strange land, filled with power of beauty, stumbling and stammering and vainly trying to sing in the rough, barbaric tongue of his brethren in the new land. </span>
      <span id="f2481"> And so with him. </span>
      <span id="f2482"> He was alive, painfully alive, to the great universal things, and yet he was compelled to potter and grope among schoolboy topics and debate whether or not he should study Latin.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2483">&#34;What in hell has Latin to do with it?&#34; he demanded before his mirror that night. </span>
      <span id="f2484"> &#34;I wish dead people would stay dead. </span>
      <span id="f2485"> Why should I and the beauty in me be ruled by the dead? </span>
      <span id="f2486"> Beauty is alive and everlasting. </span>
      <span id="f2487">Languages come and go. </span>
      <span id="f2488"> They are the dust of the dead.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2489">And his next thought was that he had been phrasing his ideas very well, and he went to bed wondering why he could not talk in similar fashion when he was with Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f2490"> He was only a schoolboy, with a schoolboy&#39;s tongue, when he was in her presence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2491">&#34;Give me time,&#34; he said aloud. </span>
      <span id="f2492"> &#34;Only give me time.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2493">Time! </span>
      <span id="f2494"> Time! </span>
      <span id="f2495"> Time! </span>
      <span id="f2496">was his unending plaint.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>