<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XIV</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f2497">CHAPTER XIV</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f2498">It was not because of Olney, but in spite of Ruth, and his love for Ruth, that he finally decided not to take up Latin. </span>
      <span id="f2499"> His money meant time. </span>
      <span id="f2500">There was so much that was more important than Latin, so many studies that clamored with imperious voices. </span>
      <span id="f2501"> And he must write. </span>
      <span id="f2502"> He must earn money. </span>
      <span id="f2503"> He had had no acceptances. </span>
      <span id="f2504"> Twoscore of manuscripts were travelling the endless round of the magazines. </span>
      <span id="f2505"> How did the others do it? </span>
      <span id="f2506">He spent long hours in the free reading-room, going over what others had written, studying their work eagerly and critically, comparing it with his own, and wondering, wondering, about the secret trick they had discovered which enabled them to sell their work.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2507">He was amazed at the immense amount of printed stuff that was dead. </span>
      <span id="f2508"> No light, no life, no color, was shot through it. </span>
      <span id="f2509"> There was no breath of life in it, and yet it sold, at two cents a word, twenty dollars a thousand--the newspaper clipping had said so. </span>
      <span id="f2510"> He was puzzled by countless short stories, written lightly and cleverly he confessed, but without vitality or reality. </span>
      <span id="f2511"> Life was so strange and wonderful, filled with an immensity of problems, of dreams, and of heroic toils, and yet these stories dealt only with the commonplaces of life. </span>
      <span id="f2512"> He felt the stress and strain of life, its fevers and sweats and wild insurgences--surely this was the stuff to write about! </span>
      <span id="f2513"> He wanted to glorify the leaders of forlorn hopes, the mad lovers, the giants that fought under stress and strain, amid terror and tragedy, making life crackle with the strength of their endeavor. </span>
      <span id="f2514"> And yet the magazine short stories seemed intent on glorifying the Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2515">Butlers, the sordid dollar- chasers, and the commonplace little love affairs of commonplace little men and women. </span>
      <span id="f2516"> Was it because the editors of the magazines were commonplace? </span>
      <span id="f2517">he demanded. </span>
      <span id="f2518"> Or were they afraid of life, these writers and editors and readers?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2519">But his chief trouble was that he did not know any editors or writers. </span>
      <span id="f2520">And not merely did he not know any writers, but he did not know anybody who had ever attempted to write. </span>
      <span id="f2521"> There was nobody to tell him, to hint to him, to give him the least word of advice. </span>
      <span id="f2522"> He began to doubt that editors were real men. </span>
      <span id="f2523"> They seemed cogs in a machine. </span>
      <span id="f2524"> That was what it was, a machine. </span>
      <span id="f2525"> He poured his soul into stories, articles, and poems, and intrusted them to the machine. </span>
      <span id="f2526"> He folded them just so, put the proper stamps inside the long envelope along with the manuscript, sealed the envelope, put more stamps outside, and dropped it into the mail-box. </span>
      <span id="f2527">It travelled across the continent, and after a certain lapse of time the postman returned him the manuscript in another long envelope, on the outside of which were the stamps he had enclosed. </span>
      <span id="f2528"> There was no human editor at the other end, but a mere cunning arrangement of cogs that changed the manuscript from one envelope to another and stuck on the stamps. </span>
      <span id="f2529"> It was like the slot machines wherein one dropped pennies, and, with a metallic whirl of machinery had delivered to him a stick of chewing-gum or a tablet of chocolate. </span>
      <span id="f2530"> It depended upon which slot one dropped the penny in, whether he got chocolate or gum. </span>
      <span id="f2531"> And so with the editorial machine. </span>
      <span id="f2532"> One slot brought checks and the other brought rejection slips. </span>
      <span id="f2533"> So far he had found only the latter slot.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2534">It was the rejection slips that completed the horrible machinelikeness of the process. </span>
      <span id="f2535"> These slips were printed in stereotyped forms and he had received hundreds of them--as many as a dozen or more on each of his earlier manuscripts. </span>
      <span id="f2536"> If he had received one line, one personal line, along with one rejection of all his rejections, he would have been cheered. </span>
      <span id="f2537"> But not one editor had given that proof of existence. </span>
      <span id="f2538"> And he could conclude only that there were no warm human men at the other end, only mere cogs, well oiled and running beautifully in the machine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2539">He was a good fighter, whole-souled and stubborn, and he would have been content to continue feeding the machine for years; but he was bleeding to death, and not years but weeks would determine the fight. </span>
      <span id="f2540"> Each week his board bill brought him nearer destruction, while the postage on forty manuscripts bled him almost as severely. </span>
      <span id="f2541"> He no longer bought books, and he economized in petty ways and sought to delay the inevitable end; though he did not know how to economize, and brought the end nearer by a week when he gave his sister Marian five dollars for a dress.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2542">He struggled in the dark, without advice, without encouragement, and in the teeth of discouragement. </span>
      <span id="f2543"> Even Gertrude was beginning to look askance. </span>
      <span id="f2544"> At first she had tolerated with sisterly fondness what she conceived to be his foolishness; but now, out of sisterly solicitude, she grew anxious. </span>
      <span id="f2545"> To her it seemed that his foolishness was becoming a madness. </span>
      <span id="f2546"> Martin knew this and suffered more keenly from it than from the open and nagging contempt of Bernard Higginbotham. </span>
      <span id="f2547"> Martin had faith in himself, but he was alone in this faith. </span>
      <span id="f2548"> Not even Ruth had faith. </span>
      <span id="f2549"> She had wanted him to devote himself to study, and, though she had not openly disapproved of his writing, she had never approved.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2550">He had never offered to show her his work. </span>
      <span id="f2551"> A fastidious delicacy had prevented him. </span>
      <span id="f2552"> Besides, she had been studying heavily at the university, and he felt averse to robbing her of her time. </span>
      <span id="f2553"> But when she had taken her degree, she asked him herself to let her see something of what he had been doing. </span>
      <span id="f2554"> Martin was elated and diffident. </span>
      <span id="f2555"> Here was a judge. </span>
      <span id="f2556"> She was a bachelor of arts. </span>
      <span id="f2557"> She had studied literature under skilled instructors. </span>
      <span id="f2558"> Perhaps the editors were capable judges, too. </span>
      <span id="f2559"> But she would be different from them. </span>
      <span id="f2560"> She would not hand him a stereotyped rejection slip, nor would she inform him that lack of preference for his work did not necessarily imply lack of merit in his work. </span>
      <span id="f2561"> She would talk, a warm human being, in her quick, bright way, and, most important of all, she would catch glimpses of the real Martin Eden. </span>
      <span id="f2562"> In his work she would discern what his heart and soul were like, and she would come to understand something, a little something, of the stuff of his dreams and the strength of his power.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2563">Martin gathered together a number of carbon copies of his short stories, hesitated a moment, then added his &#34;Sea Lyrics.&#34;  They mounted their wheels on a late June afternoon and rode for the hills. </span>
      <span id="f2564"> It was the second time he had been out with her alone, and as they rode along through the balmy warmth, just chilled by she sea-breeze to refreshing coolness, he was profoundly impressed by the fact that it was a very beautiful and well-ordered world and that it was good to be alive and to love. </span>
      <span id="f2565"> They left their wheels by the roadside and climbed to the brown top of an open knoll where the sunburnt grass breathed a harvest breath of dry sweetness and content.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2566">&#34;Its work is done,&#34; Martin said, as they seated themselves, she upon his coat, and he sprawling close to the warm earth. </span>
      <span id="f2567"> He sniffed the sweetness of the tawny grass, which entered his brain and set his thoughts whirling on from the particular to the universal. </span>
      <span id="f2568"> &#34;It has achieved its reason for existence,&#34; he went on, patting the dry grass affectionately. </span>
      <span id="f2569"> &#34;It quickened with ambition under the dreary downpour of last winter, fought the violent early spring, flowered, and lured the insects and the bees, scattered its seeds, squared itself with its duty and the world, and--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2570">&#34;Why do you always look at things with such dreadfully practical eyes?&#34; she interrupted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2571">&#34;Because I&#39;ve been studying evolution, I guess. </span>
      <span id="f2572"> It&#39;s only recently that I got my eyesight, if the truth were told.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2573">&#34;But it seems to me you lose sight of beauty by being so practical, that you destroy beauty like the boys who catch butterflies and rub the down off their beautiful wings.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2574">He shook his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2575">&#34;Beauty has significance, but I never knew its significance before. </span>
      <span id="f2576"> I just accepted beauty as something meaningless, as something that was just beautiful without rhyme or reason. </span>
      <span id="f2577"> I did not know anything about beauty. </span>
      <span id="f2578">But now I know, or, rather, am just beginning to know. </span>
      <span id="f2579"> This grass is more beautiful to me now that I know why it is grass, and all the hidden chemistry of sun and rain and earth that makes it become grass. </span>
      <span id="f2580"> Why, there is romance in the life-history of any grass, yes, and adventure, too. </span>
      <span id="f2581"> The very thought of it stirs me. </span>
      <span id="f2582"> When I think of the play of force and matter, and all the tremendous struggle of it, I feel as if I could write an epic on the grass.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2583">&#34;How well you talk,&#34; she said absently, and he noted that she was looking at him in a searching way.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2584">He was all confusion and embarrassment on the instant, the blood flushing red on his neck and brow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2585">&#34;I hope I am learning to talk,&#34; he stammered. </span>
      <span id="f2586"> &#34;There seems to be so much in me I want to say. </span>
      <span id="f2587"> But it is all so big. </span>
      <span id="f2588"> I can&#39;t find ways to say what is really in me. </span>
      <span id="f2589"> Sometimes it seems to me that all the world, all life, everything, had taken up residence inside of me and was clamoring for me to be the spokesman. </span>
      <span id="f2590"> I feel--oh, I can&#39;t describe it--I feel the bigness of it, but when I speak, I babble like a little child. </span>
      <span id="f2591"> It is a great task to transmute feeling and sensation into speech, written or spoken, that will, in turn, in him who reads or listens, transmute itself back into the selfsame feeling and sensation. </span>
      <span id="f2592"> It is a lordly task. </span>
      <span id="f2593"> See, I bury my face in the grass, and the breath I draw in through my nostrils sets me quivering with a thousand thoughts and fancies. </span>
      <span id="f2594"> It is a breath of the universe I have breathed. </span>
      <span id="f2595"> I know song and laughter, and success and pain, and struggle and death; and I see visions that arise in my brain somehow out of the scent of the grass, and I would like to tell them to you, to the world. </span>
      <span id="f2596"> But how can I? </span>
      <span id="f2597"> My tongue is tied. </span>
      <span id="f2598"> I have tried, by the spoken word, just now, to describe to you the effect on me of the scent of the grass. </span>
      <span id="f2599"> But I have not succeeded. </span>
      <span id="f2600"> I have no more than hinted in awkward speech. </span>
      <span id="f2601"> My words seem gibberish to me. </span>
      <span id="f2602"> And yet I am stifled with desire to tell. </span>
      <span id="f2603"> Oh!--&#34; he threw up his hands with a despairing gesture--&#34;it is impossible! </span>
      <span id="f2604"> It is not understandable! </span>
      <span id="f2605"> It is incommunicable!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2606">&#34;But you do talk well,&#34; she insisted. </span>
      <span id="f2607"> &#34;Just think how you have improved in the short time I have known you. </span>
      <span id="f2608"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2609">Butler is a noted public speaker. </span>
      <span id="f2610"> He is always asked by the State Committee to go out on stump during campaign. </span>
      <span id="f2611"> Yet you talked just as well as he the other night at dinner. </span>
      <span id="f2612"> Only he was more controlled. </span>
      <span id="f2613"> You get too excited; but you will get over that with practice. </span>
      <span id="f2614"> Why, you would make a good public speaker. </span>
      <span id="f2615">You can go far--if you want to. </span>
      <span id="f2616"> You are masterly. </span>
      <span id="f2617"> You can lead men, I am sure, and there is no reason why you should not succeed at anything you set your hand to, just as you have succeeded with grammar. </span>
      <span id="f2618"> You would make a good lawyer. </span>
      <span id="f2619"> You should shine in politics. </span>
      <span id="f2620"> There is nothing to prevent you from making as great a success as Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2621">Butler has made. </span>
      <span id="f2622"> And minus the dyspepsia,&#34; she added with a smile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2623">They talked on; she, in her gently persistent way, returning always to the need of thorough grounding in education and to the advantages of Latin as part of the foundation for any career. </span>
      <span id="f2624"> She drew her ideal of the successful man, and it was largely in her father&#39;s image, with a few unmistakable lines and touches of color from the image of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2625">Butler. </span>
      <span id="f2626"> He listened eagerly, with receptive ears, lying on his back and looking up and joying in each movement of her lips as she talked. </span>
      <span id="f2627"> But his brain was not receptive. </span>
      <span id="f2628"> There was nothing alluring in the pictures she drew, and he was aware of a dull pain of disappointment and of a sharper ache of love for her. </span>
      <span id="f2629"> In all she said there was no mention of his writing, and the manuscripts he had brought to read lay neglected on the ground.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2630">At last, in a pause, he glanced at the sun, measured its height above the horizon, and suggested his manuscripts by picking them up.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2631">&#34;I had forgotten,&#34; she said quickly. </span>
      <span id="f2632"> &#34;And I am so anxious to hear.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2633">He read to her a story, one that he flattered himself was among his very best. </span>
      <span id="f2634"> He called it &#34;The Wine of Life,&#34; and the wine of it, that had stolen into his brain when he wrote it, stole into his brain now as he read it. </span>
      <span id="f2635"> There was a certain magic in the original conception, and he had adorned it with more magic of phrase and touch. </span>
      <span id="f2636"> All the old fire and passion with which he had written it were reborn in him, and he was swayed and swept away so that he was blind and deaf to the faults of it. </span>
      <span id="f2637">But it was not so with Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f2638"> Her trained ear detected the weaknesses and exaggerations, the overemphasis of the tyro, and she was instantly aware each time the sentence-rhythm tripped and faltered. </span>
      <span id="f2639"> She scarcely noted the rhythm otherwise, except when it became too pompous, at which moments she was disagreeably impressed with its amateurishness. </span>
      <span id="f2640"> That was her final judgment on the story as a whole--amateurish, though she did not tell him so. </span>
      <span id="f2641"> Instead, when he had done, she pointed out the minor flaws and said that she liked the story.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2642">But he was disappointed. </span>
      <span id="f2643"> Her criticism was just. </span>
      <span id="f2644"> He acknowledged that, but he had a feeling that he was not sharing his work with her for the purpose of schoolroom correction. </span>
      <span id="f2645"> The details did not matter. </span>
      <span id="f2646"> They could take care of themselves. </span>
      <span id="f2647"> He could mend them, he could learn to mend them. </span>
      <span id="f2648"> Out of life he had captured something big and attempted to imprison it in the story. </span>
      <span id="f2649"> It was the big thing out of life he had read to her, not sentence-structure and semicolons. </span>
      <span id="f2650"> He wanted her to feel with him this big thing that was his, that he had seen with his own eyes, grappled with his own brain, and placed there on the page with his own hands in printed words. </span>
      <span id="f2651"> Well, he had failed, was his secret decision. </span>
      <span id="f2652">Perhaps the editors were right. </span>
      <span id="f2653"> He had felt the big thing, but he had failed to transmute it. </span>
      <span id="f2654"> He concealed his disappointment, and joined so easily with her in her criticism that she did not realize that deep down in him was running a strong undercurrent of disagreement.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2655">&#34;This next thing I&#39;ve called &#39;The Pot&#39;,&#34; he said, unfolding the manuscript. </span>
      <span id="f2656"> &#34;It has been refused by four or five magazines now, but still I think it is good. </span>
      <span id="f2657"> In fact, I don&#39;t know what to think of it, except that I&#39;ve caught something there. </span>
      <span id="f2658"> Maybe it won&#39;t affect you as it does me. </span>
      <span id="f2659"> It&#39;s a short thing--only two thousand words.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2660">&#34;How dreadful!&#34; she cried, when he had finished. </span>
      <span id="f2661"> &#34;It is horrible, unutterably horrible!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2662">He noted her pale face, her eyes wide and tense, and her clenched hands, with secret satisfaction. </span>
      <span id="f2663"> He had succeeded. </span>
      <span id="f2664"> He had communicated the stuff of fancy and feeling from out of his brain. </span>
      <span id="f2665"> It had struck home. </span>
      <span id="f2666"> No matter whether she liked it or not, it had gripped her and mastered her, made her sit there and listen and forget details.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2667">&#34;It is life,&#34; he said, &#34;and life is not always beautiful. </span>
      <span id="f2668"> And yet, perhaps because I am strangely made, I find something beautiful there. </span>
      <span id="f2669"> It seems to me that the beauty is tenfold enhanced because it is there--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2670">&#34;But why couldn&#39;t the poor woman--&#34; she broke in disconnectedly. </span>
      <span id="f2671"> Then she left the revolt of her thought unexpressed to cry out: &#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f2672"> It is degrading! </span>
      <span id="f2673"> It is not nice! </span>
      <span id="f2674"> It is nasty!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2675">For the moment it seemed to him that his heart stood still. </span>
      <span id="f2676"> _Nasty_! </span>
      <span id="f2677"> He had never dreamed it. </span>
      <span id="f2678"> He had not meant it. </span>
      <span id="f2679"> The whole sketch stood before him in letters of fire, and in such blaze of illumination he sought vainly for nastiness. </span>
      <span id="f2680"> Then his heart began to beat again. </span>
      <span id="f2681"> He was not guilty.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2682">&#34;Why didn&#39;t you select a nice subject?&#34; she was saying. </span>
      <span id="f2683"> &#34;We know there are nasty things in the world, but that is no reason--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2684">She talked on in her indignant strain, but he was not following her. </span>
      <span id="f2685"> He was smiling to himself as he looked up into her virginal face, so innocent, so penetratingly innocent, that its purity seemed always to enter into him, driving out of him all dross and bathing him in some ethereal effulgence that was as cool and soft and velvety as starshine. </span>
      <span id="f2686">_We know there are nasty things in the world_! </span>
      <span id="f2687"> He cuddled to him the notion of her knowing, and chuckled over it as a love joke. </span>
      <span id="f2688"> The next moment, in a flashing vision of multitudinous detail, he sighted the whole sea of life&#39;s nastiness that he had known and voyaged over and through, and he forgave her for not understanding the story. </span>
      <span id="f2689"> It was through no fault of hers that she could not understand. </span>
      <span id="f2690"> He thanked God that she had been born and sheltered to such innocence. </span>
      <span id="f2691"> But he knew life, its foulness as well as its fairness, its greatness in spite of the slime that infested it, and by God he was going to have his say on it to the world. </span>
      <span id="f2692"> Saints in heaven--how could they be anything but fair and pure? </span>
      <span id="f2693"> No praise to them. </span>
      <span id="f2694"> But saints in slime--ah, that was the everlasting wonder! </span>
      <span id="f2695"> That was what made life worth while. </span>
      <span id="f2696"> To see moral grandeur rising out of cesspools of iniquity; to rise himself and first glimpse beauty, faint and far, through mud-dripping eyes; to see out of weakness, and frailty, and viciousness, and all abysmal brutishness, arising strength, and truth, and high spiritual endowment--</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2697">He caught a stray sequence of sentences she was uttering.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2698">&#34;The tone of it all is low. </span>
      <span id="f2699"> And there is so much that is high. </span>
      <span id="f2700"> Take &#39;In Memoriam.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2701">He was impelled to suggest &#34;Locksley Hall,&#34; and would have done so, had not his vision gripped him again and left him staring at her, the female of his kind, who, out of the primordial ferment, creeping and crawling up the vast ladder of life for a thousand thousand centuries, had emerged on the topmost rung, having become one Ruth, pure, and fair, and divine, and with power to make him know love, and to aspire toward purity, and to desire to taste divinity--him, Martin Eden, who, too, had come up in some amazing fashion from out of the ruck and the mire and the countless mistakes and abortions of unending creation. </span>
      <span id="f2702"> There was the romance, and the wonder, and the glory. </span>
      <span id="f2703"> There was the stuff to write, if he could only find speech. </span>
      <span id="f2704"> Saints in heaven!--They were only saints and could not help themselves. </span>
      <span id="f2705"> But he was a man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2706">&#34;You have strength,&#34; he could hear her saying, &#34;but it is untutored strength.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2707">&#34;Like a bull in a china shop,&#34; he suggested, and won a smile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2708">&#34;And you must develop discrimination. </span>
      <span id="f2709"> You must consult taste, and fineness, and tone.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2710">&#34;I dare too much,&#34; he muttered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2711">She smiled approbation, and settled herself to listen to another story.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2712">&#34;I don&#39;t know what you&#39;ll make of this,&#34; he said apologetically. </span>
      <span id="f2713"> &#34;It&#39;s a funny thing. </span>
      <span id="f2714"> I&#39;m afraid I got beyond my depth in it, but my intentions were good. </span>
      <span id="f2715"> Don&#39;t bother about the little features of it. </span>
      <span id="f2716"> Just see if you catch the feel of the big thing in it. </span>
      <span id="f2717"> It is big, and it is true, though the chance is large that I have failed to make it intelligible.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2718">He read, and as he read he watched her. </span>
      <span id="f2719"> At last he had reached her, he thought. </span>
      <span id="f2720"> She sat without movement, her eyes steadfast upon him, scarcely breathing, caught up and out of herself, he thought, by the witchery of the thing he had created. </span>
      <span id="f2721"> He had entitled the story &#34;Adventure,&#34; and it was the apotheosis of adventure--not of the adventure of the storybooks, but of real adventure, the savage taskmaster, awful of punishment and awful of reward, faithless and whimsical, demanding terrible patience and heartbreaking days and nights of toil, offering the blazing sunlight glory or dark death at the end of thirst and famine or of the long drag and monstrous delirium of rotting fever, through blood and sweat and stinging insects leading up by long chains of petty and ignoble contacts to royal culminations and lordly achievements.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2722">It was this, all of it, and more, that he had put into his story, and it was this, he believed, that warmed her as she sat and listened. </span>
      <span id="f2723"> Her eyes were wide, color was in her pale cheeks, and before he finished it seemed to him that she was almost panting. </span>
      <span id="f2724"> Truly, she was warmed; but she was warmed, not by the story, but by him. </span>
      <span id="f2725"> She did not think much of the story; it was Martin&#39;s intensity of power, the old excess of strength that seemed to pour from his body and on and over her. </span>
      <span id="f2726"> The paradox of it was that it was the story itself that was freighted with his power, that was the channel, for the time being, through which his strength poured out to her. </span>
      <span id="f2727"> She was aware only of the strength, and not of the medium, and when she seemed most carried away by what he had written, in reality she had been carried away by something quite foreign to it--by a thought, terrible and perilous, that had formed itself unsummoned in her brain. </span>
      <span id="f2728">She had caught herself wondering what marriage was like, and the becoming conscious of the waywardness and ardor of the thought had terrified her. </span>
      <span id="f2729">It was unmaidenly. </span>
      <span id="f2730"> It was not like her. </span>
      <span id="f2731"> She had never been tormented by womanhood, and she had lived in a dreamland of Tennysonian poesy, dense even to the full significance of that delicate master&#39;s delicate allusions to the grossnesses that intrude upon the relations of queens and knights. </span>
      <span id="f2732"> She had been asleep, always, and now life was thundering imperatively at all her doors. </span>
      <span id="f2733"> Mentally she was in a panic to shoot the bolts and drop the bars into place, while wanton instincts urged her to throw wide her portals and bid the deliciously strange visitor to enter in.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2734">Martin waited with satisfaction for her verdict. </span>
      <span id="f2735"> He had no doubt of what it would be, and he was astounded when he heard her say:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2736">&#34;It is beautiful.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2737">&#34;It is beautiful,&#34; she repeated, with emphasis, after a pause.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2738">Of course it was beautiful; but there was something more than mere beauty in it, something more stingingly splendid which had made beauty its handmaiden. </span>
      <span id="f2739"> He sprawled silently on the ground, watching the grisly form of a great doubt rising before him. </span>
      <span id="f2740"> He had failed. </span>
      <span id="f2741"> He was inarticulate. </span>
      <span id="f2742">He had seen one of the greatest things in the world, and he had not expressed it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2743">&#34;What did you think of the--&#34;  He hesitated, abashed at his first attempt to use a strange word. </span>
      <span id="f2744"> &#34;Of the _motif_?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2745">&#34;It was confused,&#34; she answered. </span>
      <span id="f2746"> &#34;That is my only criticism in the large way. </span>
      <span id="f2747"> I followed the story, but there seemed so much else. </span>
      <span id="f2748"> It is too wordy. </span>
      <span id="f2749"> You clog the action by introducing so much extraneous material.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2750">&#34;That was the major _motif_,&#34; he hurriedly explained, &#34;the big underrunning _motif_, the cosmic and universal thing. </span>
      <span id="f2751"> I tried to make it keep time with the story itself, which was only superficial after all. </span>
      <span id="f2752"> I was on the right scent, but I guess I did it badly. </span>
      <span id="f2753"> I did not succeed in suggesting what I was driving at. </span>
      <span id="f2754"> But I&#39;ll learn in time.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2755">She did not follow him. </span>
      <span id="f2756"> She was a bachelor of arts, but he had gone beyond her limitations. </span>
      <span id="f2757"> This she did not comprehend, attributing her incomprehension to his incoherence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2758">&#34;You were too voluble,&#34; she said. </span>
      <span id="f2759"> &#34;But it was beautiful, in places.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2760">He heard her voice as from far off, for he was debating whether he would read her the &#34;Sea Lyrics.&#34;  He lay in dull despair, while she watched him searchingly, pondering again upon unsummoned and wayward thoughts of marriage.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2761">&#34;You want to be famous?&#34; she asked abruptly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2762">&#34;Yes, a little bit,&#34; he confessed. </span>
      <span id="f2763"> &#34;That is part of the adventure. </span>
      <span id="f2764"> It is not the being famous, but the process of becoming so, that counts. </span>
      <span id="f2765"> And after all, to be famous would be, for me, only a means to something else. </span>
      <span id="f2766">I want to be famous very much, for that matter, and for that reason.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2767">&#34;For your sake,&#34; he wanted to add, and might have added had she proved enthusiastic over what he had read to her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2768">But she was too busy in her mind, carving out a career for him that would at least be possible, to ask what the ultimate something was which he had hinted at. </span>
      <span id="f2769"> There was no career for him in literature. </span>
      <span id="f2770"> Of that she was convinced. </span>
      <span id="f2771"> He had proved it to-day, with his amateurish and sophomoric productions. </span>
      <span id="f2772"> He could talk well, but he was incapable of expressing himself in a literary way. </span>
      <span id="f2773"> She compared Tennyson, and Browning, and her favorite prose masters with him, and to his hopeless discredit. </span>
      <span id="f2774"> Yet she did not tell him her whole mind. </span>
      <span id="f2775"> Her strange interest in him led her to temporize. </span>
      <span id="f2776"> His desire to write was, after all, a little weakness which he would grow out of in time. </span>
      <span id="f2777"> Then he would devote himself to the more serious affairs of life. </span>
      <span id="f2778"> And he would succeed, too. </span>
      <span id="f2779"> She knew that. </span>
      <span id="f2780"> He was so strong that he could not fail--if only he would drop writing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2781">&#34;I wish you would show me all you write, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2782">Eden,&#34; she said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2783">He flushed with pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f2784"> She was interested, that much was sure. </span>
      <span id="f2785"> And at least she had not given him a rejection slip. </span>
      <span id="f2786"> She had called certain portions of his work beautiful, and that was the first encouragement he had ever received from any one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2787">&#34;I will,&#34; he said passionately. </span>
      <span id="f2788"> &#34;And I promise you, Miss Morse, that I will make good. </span>
      <span id="f2789"> I have come far, I know that; and I have far to go, and I will cover it if I have to do it on my hands and knees.&#34;  He held up a bunch of manuscript. </span>
      <span id="f2790"> &#34;Here are the &#39;Sea Lyrics.&#39;  When you get home, I&#39;ll turn them over to you to read at your leisure. </span>
      <span id="f2791"> And you must be sure to tell me just what you think of them. </span>
      <span id="f2792"> What I need, you know, above all things, is criticism. </span>
      <span id="f2793"> And do, please, be frank with me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2794">&#34;I will be perfectly frank,&#34; she promised, with an uneasy conviction that she had not been frank with him and with a doubt if she could be quite frank with him the next time.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>