<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f2795">CHAPTER XV</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f2796">&#34;The first battle, fought and finished,&#34; Martin said to the looking-glass ten days later. </span>
      <span id="f2797"> &#34;But there will be a second battle, and a third battle, and battles to the end of time, unless--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2798">He had not finished the sentence, but looked about the mean little room and let his eyes dwell sadly upon a heap of returned manuscripts, still in their long envelopes, which lay in a corner on the floor. </span>
      <span id="f2799"> He had no stamps with which to continue them on their travels, and for a week they had been piling up. </span>
      <span id="f2800"> More of them would come in on the morrow, and on the next day, and the next, till they were all in. </span>
      <span id="f2801"> And he would be unable to start them out again. </span>
      <span id="f2802"> He was a month&#39;s rent behind on the typewriter, which he could not pay, having barely enough for the week&#39;s board which was due and for the employment office fees.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2803">He sat down and regarded the table thoughtfully. </span>
      <span id="f2804"> There were ink stains upon it, and he suddenly discovered that he was fond of it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2805">&#34;Dear old table,&#34; he said, &#34;I&#39;ve spent some happy hours with you, and you&#39;ve been a pretty good friend when all is said and done. </span>
      <span id="f2806"> You never turned me down, never passed me out a reward-of-unmerit rejection slip, never complained about working overtime.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2807">He dropped his arms upon the table and buried his face in them. </span>
      <span id="f2808"> His throat was aching, and he wanted to cry. </span>
      <span id="f2809"> It reminded him of his first fight, when he was six years old, when he punched away with the tears running down his cheeks while the other boy, two years his elder, had beaten and pounded him into exhaustion. </span>
      <span id="f2810"> He saw the ring of boys, howling like barbarians as he went down at last, writhing in the throes of nausea, the blood streaming from his nose and the tears from his bruised eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2811">&#34;Poor little shaver,&#34; he murmured. </span>
      <span id="f2812"> &#34;And you&#39;re just as badly licked now. </span>
      <span id="f2813">You&#39;re beaten to a pulp. </span>
      <span id="f2814"> You&#39;re down and out.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2815">But the vision of that first fight still lingered under his eyelids, and as he watched he saw it dissolve and reshape into the series of fights which had followed. </span>
      <span id="f2816"> Six months later Cheese-Face (that was the boy) had whipped him again. </span>
      <span id="f2817"> But he had blacked Cheese-Face&#39;s eye that time. </span>
      <span id="f2818"> That was going some. </span>
      <span id="f2819"> He saw them all, fight after fight, himself always whipped and Cheese-Face exulting over him. </span>
      <span id="f2820"> But he had never run away. </span>
      <span id="f2821"> He felt strengthened by the memory of that. </span>
      <span id="f2822"> He had always stayed and taken his medicine. </span>
      <span id="f2823"> Cheese-Face had been a little fiend at fighting, and had never once shown mercy to him. </span>
      <span id="f2824"> But he had stayed! </span>
      <span id="f2825"> He had stayed with it!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2826">Next, he saw a narrow alley, between ramshackle frame buildings. </span>
      <span id="f2827"> The end of the alley was blocked by a one-story brick building, out of which issued the rhythmic thunder of the presses, running off the first edition of the Enquirer. </span>
      <span id="f2828"> He was eleven, and Cheese-Face was thirteen, and they both carried the Enquirer. </span>
      <span id="f2829"> That was why they were there, waiting for their papers. </span>
      <span id="f2830"> And, of course, Cheese-Face had picked on him again, and there was another fight that was indeterminate, because at quarter to four the door of the press-room was thrown open and the gang of boys crowded in to fold their papers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2831">&#34;I&#39;ll lick you to-morrow,&#34; he heard Cheese-Face promise; and he heard his own voice, piping and trembling with unshed tears, agreeing to be there on the morrow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2832">And he had come there the next day, hurrying from school to be there first, and beating Cheese-Face by two minutes. </span>
      <span id="f2833"> The other boys said he was all right, and gave him advice, pointing out his faults as a scrapper and promising him victory if he carried out their instructions. </span>
      <span id="f2834"> The same boys gave Cheese-Face advice, too. </span>
      <span id="f2835"> How they had enjoyed the fight! </span>
      <span id="f2836"> He paused in his recollections long enough to envy them the spectacle he and Cheese-Face had put up. </span>
      <span id="f2837"> Then the fight was on, and it went on, without rounds, for thirty minutes, until the press-room door was opened.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2838">He watched the youthful apparition of himself, day after day, hurrying from school to the Enquirer alley. </span>
      <span id="f2839"> He could not walk very fast. </span>
      <span id="f2840"> He was stiff and lame from the incessant fighting. </span>
      <span id="f2841"> His forearms were black and blue from wrist to elbow, what of the countless blows he had warded off, and here and there the tortured flesh was beginning to fester. </span>
      <span id="f2842"> His head and arms and shoulders ached, the small of his back ached,--he ached all over, and his brain was heavy and dazed. </span>
      <span id="f2843"> He did not play at school. </span>
      <span id="f2844"> Nor did he study. </span>
      <span id="f2845"> Even to sit still all day at his desk, as he did, was a torment. </span>
      <span id="f2846"> It seemed centuries since he had begun the round of daily fights, and time stretched away into a nightmare and infinite future of daily fights. </span>
      <span id="f2847"> Why couldn&#39;t Cheese-Face be licked? </span>
      <span id="f2848">he often thought; that would put him, Martin, out of his misery. </span>
      <span id="f2849"> It never entered his head to cease fighting, to allow Cheese-Face to whip him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2850">And so he dragged himself to the Enquirer alley, sick in body and soul, but learning the long patience, to confront his eternal enemy, Cheese- Face, who was just as sick as he, and just a bit willing to quit if it were not for the gang of newsboys that looked on and made pride painful and necessary. </span>
      <span id="f2851"> One afternoon, after twenty minutes of desperate efforts to annihilate each other according to set rules that did not permit kicking, striking below the belt, nor hitting when one was down, Cheese- Face, panting for breath and reeling, offered to call it quits. </span>
      <span id="f2852"> And Martin, head on arms, thrilled at the picture he caught of himself, at that moment in the afternoon of long ago, when he reeled and panted and choked with the blood that ran into his mouth and down his throat from his cut lips; when he tottered toward Cheese-Face, spitting out a mouthful of blood so that he could speak, crying out that he would never quit, though Cheese-Face could give in if he wanted to. </span>
      <span id="f2853"> And Cheese-Face did not give in, and the fight went on.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2854">The next day and the next, days without end, witnessed the afternoon fight. </span>
      <span id="f2855"> When he put up his arms, each day, to begin, they pained exquisitely, and the first few blows, struck and received, racked his soul; after that things grew numb, and he fought on blindly, seeing as in a dream, dancing and wavering, the large features and burning, animal- like eyes of Cheese-Face. </span>
      <span id="f2856"> He concentrated upon that face; all else about him was a whirling void. </span>
      <span id="f2857"> There was nothing else in the world but that face, and he would never know rest, blessed rest, until he had beaten that face into a pulp with his bleeding knuckles, or until the bleeding knuckles that somehow belonged to that face had beaten him into a pulp. </span>
      <span id="f2858">And then, one way or the other, he would have rest. </span>
      <span id="f2859"> But to quit,--for him, Martin, to quit,--that was impossible!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2860">Came the day when he dragged himself into the Enquirer alley, and there was no Cheese-Face. </span>
      <span id="f2861"> Nor did Cheese-Face come. </span>
      <span id="f2862"> The boys congratulated him, and told him that he had licked Cheese-Face. </span>
      <span id="f2863"> But Martin was not satisfied. </span>
      <span id="f2864"> He had not licked Cheese-Face, nor had Cheese-Face licked him. </span>
      <span id="f2865"> The problem had not been solved. </span>
      <span id="f2866"> It was not until afterward that they learned that Cheese-Face&#39;s father had died suddenly that very day.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2867">Martin skipped on through the years to the night in the nigger heaven at the Auditorium. </span>
      <span id="f2868"> He was seventeen and just back from sea. </span>
      <span id="f2869"> A row started. </span>
      <span id="f2870">Somebody was bullying somebody, and Martin interfered, to be confronted by Cheese-Face&#39;s blazing eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2871">&#34;I&#39;ll fix you after de show,&#34; his ancient enemy hissed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2872">Martin nodded. </span>
      <span id="f2873"> The nigger-heaven bouncer was making his way toward the disturbance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2874">&#34;I&#39;ll meet you outside, after the last act,&#34; Martin whispered, the while his face showed undivided interest in the buck-and-wing dancing on the stage.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2875">The bouncer glared and went away.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2876">&#34;Got a gang?&#34; he asked Cheese-Face, at the end of the act.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2877">&#34;Sure.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2878">&#34;Then I got to get one,&#34; Martin announced.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2879">Between the acts he mustered his following--three fellows he knew from the nail works, a railroad fireman, and half a dozen of the Boo Gang, along with as many more from the dread Eighteen-and-Market Gang.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2880">When the theatre let out, the two gangs strung along inconspicuously on opposite sides of the street. </span>
      <span id="f2881"> When they came to a quiet corner, they united and held a council of war.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2882">&#34;Eighth Street Bridge is the place,&#34; said a red-headed fellow belonging to Cheese-Face&#39;s Gang. </span>
      <span id="f2883"> &#34;You kin fight in the middle, under the electric light, an&#39; whichever way the bulls come in we kin sneak the other way.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2884">&#34;That&#39;s agreeable to me,&#34; Martin said, after consulting with the leaders of his own gang.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2885">The Eighth Street Bridge, crossing an arm of San Antonio Estuary, was the length of three city blocks. </span>
      <span id="f2886"> In the middle of the bridge, and at each end, were electric lights. </span>
      <span id="f2887"> No policeman could pass those end-lights unseen. </span>
      <span id="f2888"> It was the safe place for the battle that revived itself under Martin&#39;s eyelids. </span>
      <span id="f2889"> He saw the two gangs, aggressive and sullen, rigidly keeping apart from each other and backing their respective champions; and he saw himself and Cheese-Face stripping. </span>
      <span id="f2890"> A short distance away lookouts were set, their task being to watch the lighted ends of the bridge. </span>
      <span id="f2891"> A member of the Boo Gang held Martin&#39;s coat, and shirt, and cap, ready to race with them into safety in case the police interfered. </span>
      <span id="f2892"> Martin watched himself go into the centre, facing Cheese-Face, and he heard himself say, as he held up his hand warningly:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2893">&#34;They ain&#39;t no hand-shakin&#39; in this. </span>
      <span id="f2894"> Understand? </span>
      <span id="f2895"> They ain&#39;t nothin&#39; but scrap. </span>
      <span id="f2896"> No throwin&#39; up the sponge. </span>
      <span id="f2897"> This is a grudge-fight an&#39; it&#39;s to a finish. </span>
      <span id="f2898"> Understand? </span>
      <span id="f2899"> Somebody&#39;s goin&#39; to get licked.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2900">Cheese-Face wanted to demur,--Martin could see that,--but Cheese-Face&#39;s old perilous pride was touched before the two gangs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2901">&#34;Aw, come on,&#34; he replied. </span>
      <span id="f2902"> &#34;Wot&#39;s the good of chewin&#39; de rag about it? </span>
      <span id="f2903">I&#39;m wit&#39; cheh to de finish.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2904">Then they fell upon each other, like young bulls, in all the glory of youth, with naked fists, with hatred, with desire to hurt, to maim, to destroy. </span>
      <span id="f2905"> All the painful, thousand years&#39; gains of man in his upward climb through creation were lost. </span>
      <span id="f2906"> Only the electric light remained, a milestone on the path of the great human adventure. </span>
      <span id="f2907"> Martin and Cheese- Face were two savages, of the stone age, of the squatting place and the tree refuge. </span>
      <span id="f2908"> They sank lower and lower into the muddy abyss, back into the dregs of the raw beginnings of life, striving blindly and chemically, as atoms strive, as the star-dust of the heavens strives, colliding, recoiling, and colliding again and eternally again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2909">&#34;God! </span>
      <span id="f2910"> We are animals! </span>
      <span id="f2911"> Brute-beasts!&#34;  Martin muttered aloud, as he watched the progress of the fight. </span>
      <span id="f2912"> It was to him, with his splendid power of vision, like gazing into a kinetoscope. </span>
      <span id="f2913"> He was both onlooker and participant. </span>
      <span id="f2914"> His long months of culture and refinement shuddered at the sight; then the present was blotted out of his consciousness and the ghosts of the past possessed him, and he was Martin Eden, just returned from sea and fighting Cheese-Face on the Eighth Street Bridge. </span>
      <span id="f2915"> He suffered and toiled and sweated and bled, and exulted when his naked knuckles smashed home.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2916">They were twin whirlwinds of hatred, revolving about each other monstrously. </span>
      <span id="f2917"> The time passed, and the two hostile gangs became very quiet. </span>
      <span id="f2918"> They had never witnessed such intensity of ferocity, and they were awed by it. </span>
      <span id="f2919"> The two fighters were greater brutes than they. </span>
      <span id="f2920"> The first splendid velvet edge of youth and condition wore off, and they fought more cautiously and deliberately. </span>
      <span id="f2921"> There had been no advantage gained either way. </span>
      <span id="f2922"> &#34;It&#39;s anybody&#39;s fight,&#34; Martin heard some one saying. </span>
      <span id="f2923">Then he followed up a feint, right and left, was fiercely countered, and felt his cheek laid open to the bone. </span>
      <span id="f2924"> No bare knuckle had done that. </span>
      <span id="f2925"> He heard mutters of amazement at the ghastly damage wrought, and was drenched with his own blood. </span>
      <span id="f2926"> But he gave no sign. </span>
      <span id="f2927"> He became immensely wary, for he was wise with knowledge of the low cunning and foul vileness of his kind. </span>
      <span id="f2928"> He watched and waited, until he feigned a wild rush, which he stopped midway, for he had seen the glint of metal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2929">&#34;Hold up yer hand!&#34; he screamed. </span>
      <span id="f2930"> &#34;Them&#39;s brass knuckles, an&#39; you hit me with &#39;em!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2931">Both gangs surged forward, growling and snarling. </span>
      <span id="f2932"> In a second there would be a free-for-all fight, and he would be robbed of his vengeance. </span>
      <span id="f2933">He was beside himself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2934">&#34;You guys keep out!&#34; he screamed hoarsely. </span>
      <span id="f2935"> &#34;Understand? </span>
      <span id="f2936"> Say, d&#39;ye understand?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2937">They shrank away from him. </span>
      <span id="f2938"> They were brutes, but he was the arch-brute, a thing of terror that towered over them and dominated them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2939">&#34;This is my scrap, an&#39; they ain&#39;t goin&#39; to be no buttin&#39; in. </span>
      <span id="f2940"> Gimme them knuckles.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2941">Cheese-Face, sobered and a bit frightened, surrendered the foul weapon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2942">&#34;You passed &#39;em to him, you red-head sneakin&#39; in behind the push there,&#34; Martin went on, as he tossed the knuckles into the water. </span>
      <span id="f2943"> &#34;I seen you, an&#39; I was wonderin&#39; what you was up to. </span>
      <span id="f2944"> If you try anything like that again, I&#39;ll beat cheh to death. </span>
      <span id="f2945"> Understand?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2946">They fought on, through exhaustion and beyond, to exhaustion immeasurable and inconceivable, until the crowd of brutes, its blood-lust sated, terrified by what it saw, begged them impartially to cease. </span>
      <span id="f2947"> And Cheese- Face, ready to drop and die, or to stay on his legs and die, a grisly monster out of whose features all likeness to Cheese-Face had been beaten, wavered and hesitated; but Martin sprang in and smashed him again and again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2948">Next, after a seeming century or so, with Cheese-Face weakening fast, in a mix-up of blows there was a loud snap, and Martin&#39;s right arm dropped to his side. </span>
      <span id="f2949"> It was a broken bone. </span>
      <span id="f2950"> Everybody heard it and knew; and Cheese-Face knew, rushing like a tiger in the other&#39;s extremity and raining blow on blow. </span>
      <span id="f2951"> Martin&#39;s gang surged forward to interfere. </span>
      <span id="f2952"> Dazed by the rapid succession of blows, Martin warned them back with vile and earnest curses sobbed out and groaned in ultimate desolation and despair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2953">He punched on, with his left hand only, and as he punched, doggedly, only half-conscious, as from a remote distance he heard murmurs of fear in the gangs, and one who said with shaking voice: &#34;This ain&#39;t a scrap, fellows. </span>
      <span id="f2954">It&#39;s murder, an&#39; we ought to stop it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2955">But no one stopped it, and he was glad, punching on wearily and endlessly with his one arm, battering away at a bloody something before him that was not a face but a horror, an oscillating, hideous, gibbering, nameless thing that persisted before his wavering vision and would not go away. </span>
      <span id="f2956">And he punched on and on, slower and slower, as the last shreds of vitality oozed from him, through centuries and aeons and enormous lapses of time, until, in a dim way, he became aware that the nameless thing was sinking, slowly sinking down to the rough board-planking of the bridge. </span>
      <span id="f2957">And the next moment he was standing over it, staggering and swaying on shaky legs, clutching at the air for support, and saying in a voice he did not recognize:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2958">&#34;D&#39;ye want any more? </span>
      <span id="f2959"> Say, d&#39;ye want any more?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2960">He was still saying it, over and over,--demanding, entreating, threatening, to know if it wanted any more,--when he felt the fellows of his gang laying hands on him, patting him on the back and trying to put his coat on him. </span>
      <span id="f2961"> And then came a sudden rush of blackness and oblivion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2962">The tin alarm-clock on the table ticked on, but Martin Eden, his face buried on his arms, did not hear it. </span>
      <span id="f2963"> He heard nothing. </span>
      <span id="f2964"> He did not think. </span>
      <span id="f2965"> So absolutely had he relived life that he had fainted just as he fainted years before on the Eighth Street Bridge. </span>
      <span id="f2966"> For a full minute the blackness and the blankness endured. </span>
      <span id="f2967"> Then, like one from the dead, he sprang upright, eyes flaming, sweat pouring down his face, shouting:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2968">&#34;I licked you, Cheese-Face! </span>
      <span id="f2969"> It took me eleven years, but I licked you!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2970">His knees were trembling under him, he felt faint, and he staggered back to the bed, sinking down and sitting on the edge of it. </span>
      <span id="f2971"> He was still in the clutch of the past. </span>
      <span id="f2972"> He looked about the room, perplexed, alarmed, wondering where he was, until he caught sight of the pile of manuscripts in the corner. </span>
      <span id="f2973"> Then the wheels of memory slipped ahead through four years of time, and he was aware of the present, of the books he had opened and the universe he had won from their pages, of his dreams and ambitions, and of his love for a pale wraith of a girl, sensitive and sheltered and ethereal, who would die of horror did she witness but one moment of what he had just lived through--one moment of all the muck of life through which he had waded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2974">He arose to his feet and confronted himself in the looking-glass.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2975">&#34;And so you arise from the mud, Martin Eden,&#34; he said solemnly. </span>
      <span id="f2976"> &#34;And you cleanse your eyes in a great brightness, and thrust your shoulders among the stars, doing what all life has done, letting the &#39;ape and tiger die&#39; and wresting highest heritage from all powers that be.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2977">He looked more closely at himself and laughed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2978">&#34;A bit of hysteria and melodrama, eh?&#34; he queried. </span>
      <span id="f2979"> &#34;Well, never mind. </span>
      <span id="f2980">You licked Cheese-Face, and you&#39;ll lick the editors if it takes twice eleven years to do it in. </span>
      <span id="f2981"> You can&#39;t stop here. </span>
      <span id="f2982"> You&#39;ve got to go on. </span>
      <span id="f2983">It&#39;s to a finish, you know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>