<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XVI</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f2984">CHAPTER XVI</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f2985">The alarm-clock went off, jerking Martin out of sleep with a suddenness that would have given headache to one with less splendid constitution. </span>
      <span id="f2986">Though he slept soundly, he awoke instantly, like a cat, and he awoke eagerly, glad that the five hours of unconsciousness were gone. </span>
      <span id="f2987"> He hated the oblivion of sleep. </span>
      <span id="f2988"> There was too much to do, too much of life to live. </span>
      <span id="f2989"> He grudged every moment of life sleep robbed him of, and before the clock had ceased its clattering he was head and ears in the washbasin and thrilling to the cold bite of the water.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2990">But he did not follow his regular programme. </span>
      <span id="f2991"> There was no unfinished story waiting his hand, no new story demanding articulation. </span>
      <span id="f2992"> He had studied late, and it was nearly time for breakfast. </span>
      <span id="f2993"> He tried to read a chapter in Fiske, but his brain was restless and he closed the book. </span>
      <span id="f2994"> To- day witnessed the beginning of the new battle, wherein for some time there would be no writing. </span>
      <span id="f2995"> He was aware of a sadness akin to that with which one leaves home and family. </span>
      <span id="f2996"> He looked at the manuscripts in the corner. </span>
      <span id="f2997"> That was it. </span>
      <span id="f2998"> He was going away from them, his pitiful, dishonored children that were welcome nowhere. </span>
      <span id="f2999"> He went over and began to rummage among them, reading snatches here and there, his favorite portions. </span>
      <span id="f3000"> &#34;The Pot&#34; he honored with reading aloud, as he did &#34;Adventure.&#34;  &#34;Joy,&#34; his latest-born, completed the day before and tossed into the corner for lack of stamps, won his keenest approbation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3001">&#34;I can&#39;t understand,&#34; he murmured. </span>
      <span id="f3002"> &#34;Or maybe it&#39;s the editors who can&#39;t understand. </span>
      <span id="f3003"> There&#39;s nothing wrong with that. </span>
      <span id="f3004"> They publish worse every month. </span>
      <span id="f3005"> Everything they publish is worse--nearly everything, anyway.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3006">After breakfast he put the type-writer in its case and carried it down into Oakland.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3007">&#34;I owe a month on it,&#34; he told the clerk in the store. </span>
      <span id="f3008"> &#34;But you tell the manager I&#39;m going to work and that I&#39;ll be in in a month or so and straighten up.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3009">He crossed on the ferry to San Francisco and made his way to an employment office. </span>
      <span id="f3010"> &#34;Any kind of work, no trade,&#34; he told the agent; and was interrupted by a new-comer, dressed rather foppishly, as some workingmen dress who have instincts for finer things. </span>
      <span id="f3011"> The agent shook his head despondently.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3012">&#34;Nothin&#39; doin&#39; eh?&#34; said the other. </span>
      <span id="f3013"> &#34;Well, I got to get somebody to-day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3014">He turned and stared at Martin, and Martin, staring back, noted the puffed and discolored face, handsome and weak, and knew that he had been making a night of it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3015">&#34;Lookin&#39; for a job?&#34; the other queried. </span>
      <span id="f3016"> &#34;What can you do?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3017">&#34;Hard labor, sailorizing, run a type-writer, no shorthand, can sit on a horse, willing to do anything and tackle anything,&#34; was the answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3018">The other nodded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3019">&#34;Sounds good to me. </span>
      <span id="f3020"> My name&#39;s Dawson, Joe Dawson, an&#39; I&#39;m tryin&#39; to scare up a laundryman.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3021">&#34;Too much for me.&#34;  Martin caught an amusing glimpse of himself ironing fluffy white things that women wear. </span>
      <span id="f3022"> But he had taken a liking to the other, and he added: &#34;I might do the plain washing. </span>
      <span id="f3023"> I learned that much at sea.&#34;  Joe Dawson thought visibly for a moment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3024">&#34;Look here, let&#39;s get together an&#39; frame it up. </span>
      <span id="f3025"> Willin&#39; to listen?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3026">Martin nodded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3027">&#34;This is a small laundry, up country, belongs to Shelly Hot Springs,--hotel, you know. </span>
      <span id="f3028"> Two men do the work, boss and assistant. </span>
      <span id="f3029"> I&#39;m the boss. </span>
      <span id="f3030"> You don&#39;t work for me, but you work under me. </span>
      <span id="f3031"> Think you&#39;d be willin&#39; to learn?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3032">Martin paused to think. </span>
      <span id="f3033"> The prospect was alluring. </span>
      <span id="f3034"> A few months of it, and he would have time to himself for study. </span>
      <span id="f3035"> He could work hard and study hard.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3036">&#34;Good grub an&#39; a room to yourself,&#34; Joe said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3037">That settled it. </span>
      <span id="f3038"> A room to himself where he could burn the midnight oil unmolested.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3039">&#34;But work like hell,&#34; the other added.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3040">Martin caressed his swelling shoulder-muscles significantly. </span>
      <span id="f3041"> &#34;That came from hard work.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3042">&#34;Then let&#39;s get to it.&#34;  Joe held his hand to his head for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f3043">&#34;Gee, but it&#39;s a stem-winder. </span>
      <span id="f3044"> Can hardly see. </span>
      <span id="f3045"> I went down the line last night--everything--everything. </span>
      <span id="f3046"> Here&#39;s the frame-up. </span>
      <span id="f3047"> The wages for two is a hundred and board. </span>
      <span id="f3048"> I&#39;ve ben drawin&#39; down sixty, the second man forty. </span>
      <span id="f3049"> But he knew the biz. </span>
      <span id="f3050"> You&#39;re green. </span>
      <span id="f3051"> If I break you in, I&#39;ll be doing plenty of your work at first. </span>
      <span id="f3052"> Suppose you begin at thirty, an&#39; work up to the forty. </span>
      <span id="f3053"> I&#39;ll play fair. </span>
      <span id="f3054"> Just as soon as you can do your share you get the forty.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3055">&#34;I&#39;ll go you,&#34; Martin announced, stretching out his hand, which the other shook. </span>
      <span id="f3056"> &#34;Any advance?--for rail-road ticket and extras?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3057">&#34;I blew it in,&#34; was Joe&#39;s sad answer, with another reach at his aching head. </span>
      <span id="f3058"> &#34;All I got is a return ticket.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3059">&#34;And I&#39;m broke--when I pay my board.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3060">&#34;Jump it,&#34; Joe advised.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3061">&#34;Can&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f3062"> Owe it to my sister.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3063">Joe whistled a long, perplexed whistle, and racked his brains to little purpose.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3064">&#34;I&#39;ve got the price of the drinks,&#34; he said desperately. </span>
      <span id="f3065"> &#34;Come on, an&#39; mebbe we&#39;ll cook up something.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3066">Martin declined.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3067">&#34;Water-wagon?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3068">This time Martin nodded, and Joe lamented, &#34;Wish I was.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3069">&#34;But I somehow just can&#39;t,&#34; he said in extenuation. </span>
      <span id="f3070"> &#34;After I&#39;ve ben workin&#39; like hell all week I just got to booze up. </span>
      <span id="f3071"> If I didn&#39;t, I&#39;d cut my throat or burn up the premises. </span>
      <span id="f3072"> But I&#39;m glad you&#39;re on the wagon. </span>
      <span id="f3073">Stay with it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3074">Martin knew of the enormous gulf between him and this man--the gulf the books had made; but he found no difficulty in crossing back over that gulf. </span>
      <span id="f3075"> He had lived all his life in the working-class world, and the camaraderie of labor was second nature with him. </span>
      <span id="f3076"> He solved the difficulty of transportation that was too much for the other&#39;s aching head. </span>
      <span id="f3077"> He would send his trunk up to Shelly Hot Springs on Joe&#39;s ticket. </span>
      <span id="f3078">As for himself, there was his wheel. </span>
      <span id="f3079"> It was seventy miles, and he could ride it on Sunday and be ready for work Monday morning. </span>
      <span id="f3080"> In the meantime he would go home and pack up. </span>
      <span id="f3081"> There was no one to say good-by to. </span>
      <span id="f3082"> Ruth and her whole family were spending the long summer in the Sierras, at Lake Tahoe.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3083">He arrived at Shelly Hot Springs, tired and dusty, on Sunday night. </span>
      <span id="f3084"> Joe greeted him exuberantly. </span>
      <span id="f3085"> With a wet towel bound about his aching brow, he had been at work all day.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3086">&#34;Part of last week&#39;s washin&#39; mounted up, me bein&#39; away to get you,&#34; he explained. </span>
      <span id="f3087"> &#34;Your box arrived all right. </span>
      <span id="f3088"> It&#39;s in your room. </span>
      <span id="f3089"> But it&#39;s a hell of a thing to call a trunk. </span>
      <span id="f3090"> An&#39; what&#39;s in it? </span>
      <span id="f3091"> Gold bricks?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3092">Joe sat on the bed while Martin unpacked. </span>
      <span id="f3093"> The box was a packing-case for breakfast food, and Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3094">Higginbotham had charged him half a dollar for it. </span>
      <span id="f3095"> Two rope handles, nailed on by Martin, had technically transformed it into a trunk eligible for the baggage-car. </span>
      <span id="f3096"> Joe watched, with bulging eyes, a few shirts and several changes of underclothes come out of the box, followed by books, and more books.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3097">&#34;Books clean to the bottom?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3098">Martin nodded, and went on arranging the books on a kitchen table which served in the room in place of a wash-stand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3099">&#34;Gee!&#34; Joe exploded, then waited in silence for the deduction to arise in his brain. </span>
      <span id="f3100"> At last it came.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3101">&#34;Say, you don&#39;t care for the girls--much?&#34; he queried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3102">&#34;No,&#34; was the answer. </span>
      <span id="f3103"> &#34;I used to chase a lot before I tackled the books. </span>
      <span id="f3104">But since then there&#39;s no time.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3105">&#34;And there won&#39;t be any time here. </span>
      <span id="f3106"> All you can do is work an&#39; sleep.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3107">Martin thought of his five hours&#39; sleep a night, and smiled. </span>
      <span id="f3108"> The room was situated over the laundry and was in the same building with the engine that pumped water, made electricity, and ran the laundry machinery. </span>
      <span id="f3109"> The engineer, who occupied the adjoining room, dropped in to meet the new hand and helped Martin rig up an electric bulb, on an extension wire, so that it travelled along a stretched cord from over the table to the bed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3110">The next morning, at quarter-past six, Martin was routed out for a quarter-to-seven breakfast. </span>
      <span id="f3111"> There happened to be a bath-tub for the servants in the laundry building, and he electrified Joe by taking a cold bath.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3112">&#34;Gee, but you&#39;re a hummer!&#34; Joe announced, as they sat down to breakfast in a corner of the hotel kitchen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3113">With them was the engineer, the gardener, and the assistant gardener, and two or three men from the stable. </span>
      <span id="f3114"> They ate hurriedly and gloomily, with but little conversation, and as Martin ate and listened he realized how far he had travelled from their status. </span>
      <span id="f3115"> Their small mental caliber was depressing to him, and he was anxious to get away from them. </span>
      <span id="f3116"> So he bolted his breakfast, a sickly, sloppy affair, as rapidly as they, and heaved a sigh of relief when he passed out through the kitchen door.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3117">It was a perfectly appointed, small steam laundry, wherein the most modern machinery did everything that was possible for machinery to do. </span>
      <span id="f3118">Martin, after a few instructions, sorted the great heaps of soiled clothes, while Joe started the masher and made up fresh supplies of soft- soap, compounded of biting chemicals that compelled him to swathe his mouth and nostrils and eyes in bath-towels till he resembled a mummy. </span>
      <span id="f3119">Finished the sorting, Martin lent a hand in wringing the clothes. </span>
      <span id="f3120"> This was done by dumping them into a spinning receptacle that went at a rate of a few thousand revolutions a minute, tearing the water from the clothes by centrifugal force. </span>
      <span id="f3121"> Then Martin began to alternate between the dryer and the wringer, between times &#34;shaking out&#34; socks and stockings. </span>
      <span id="f3122">By the afternoon, one feeding and one, stacking up, they were running socks and stockings through the mangle while the irons were heating. </span>
      <span id="f3123"> Then it was hot irons and underclothes till six o&#39;clock, at which time Joe shook his head dubiously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3124">&#34;Way behind,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f3125"> &#34;Got to work after supper.&#34;  And after supper they worked until ten o&#39;clock, under the blazing electric lights, until the last piece of under-clothing was ironed and folded away in the distributing room. </span>
      <span id="f3126"> It was a hot California night, and though the windows were thrown wide, the room, with its red-hot ironing-stove, was a furnace. </span>
      <span id="f3127"> Martin and Joe, down to undershirts, bare armed, sweated and panted for air.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3128">&#34;Like trimming cargo in the tropics,&#34; Martin said, when they went upstairs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3129">&#34;You&#39;ll do,&#34; Joe answered. </span>
      <span id="f3130"> &#34;You take hold like a good fellow. </span>
      <span id="f3131"> If you keep up the pace, you&#39;ll be on thirty dollars only one month. </span>
      <span id="f3132"> The second month you&#39;ll be gettin&#39; your forty. </span>
      <span id="f3133"> But don&#39;t tell me you never ironed before. </span>
      <span id="f3134"> I know better.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3135">&#34;Never ironed a rag in my life, honestly, until to-day,&#34; Martin protested.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3136">He was surprised at his weariness when he got into his room, forgetful of the fact that he had been on his feet and working without let up for fourteen hours. </span>
      <span id="f3137"> He set the alarm clock at six, and measured back five hours to one o&#39;clock. </span>
      <span id="f3138"> He could read until then. </span>
      <span id="f3139"> Slipping off his shoes, to ease his swollen feet, he sat down at the table with his books. </span>
      <span id="f3140"> He opened Fiske, where he had left off to read. </span>
      <span id="f3141"> But he found trouble and began to read it through a second time. </span>
      <span id="f3142"> Then he awoke, in pain from his stiffened muscles and chilled by the mountain wind that had begun to blow in through the window. </span>
      <span id="f3143"> He looked at the clock. </span>
      <span id="f3144"> It marked two. </span>
      <span id="f3145"> He had been asleep four hours. </span>
      <span id="f3146"> He pulled off his clothes and crawled into bed, where he was asleep the moment after his head touched the pillow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3147">Tuesday was a day of similar unremitting toil. </span>
      <span id="f3148"> The speed with which Joe worked won Martin&#39;s admiration. </span>
      <span id="f3149"> Joe was a dozen of demons for work. </span>
      <span id="f3150"> He was keyed up to concert pitch, and there was never a moment in the long day when he was not fighting for moments. </span>
      <span id="f3151"> He concentrated himself upon his work and upon how to save time, pointing out to Martin where he did in five motions what could be done in three, or in three motions what could be done in two. </span>
      <span id="f3152"> &#34;Elimination of waste motion,&#34; Martin phrased it as he watched and patterned after. </span>
      <span id="f3153"> He was a good workman himself, quick and deft, and it had always been a point of pride with him that no man should do any of his work for him or outwork him. </span>
      <span id="f3154"> As a result, he concentrated with a similar singleness of purpose, greedily snapping up the hints and suggestions thrown out by his working mate. </span>
      <span id="f3155"> He &#34;rubbed out&#34; collars and cuffs, rubbing the starch out from between the double thicknesses of linen so that there would be no blisters when it came to the ironing, and doing it at a pace that elicited Joe&#39;s praise.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3156">There was never an interval when something was not at hand to be done. </span>
      <span id="f3157">Joe waited for nothing, waited on nothing, and went on the jump from task to task. </span>
      <span id="f3158"> They starched two hundred white shirts, with a single gathering movement seizing a shirt so that the wristbands, neckband, yoke, and bosom protruded beyond the circling right hand. </span>
      <span id="f3159"> At the same moment the left hand held up the body of the shirt so that it would not enter the starch, and at the moment the right hand dipped into the starch--starch so hot that, in order to wring it out, their hands had to thrust, and thrust continually, into a bucket of cold water. </span>
      <span id="f3160"> And that night they worked till half-past ten, dipping &#34;fancy starch&#34;--all the frilled and airy, delicate wear of ladies.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3161">&#34;Me for the tropics and no clothes,&#34; Martin laughed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3162">&#34;And me out of a job,&#34; Joe answered seriously. </span>
      <span id="f3163"> &#34;I don&#39;t know nothin&#39; but laundrying.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3164">&#34;And you know it well.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3165">&#34;I ought to. </span>
      <span id="f3166"> Began in the Contra Costa in Oakland when I was eleven, shakin&#39; out for the mangle. </span>
      <span id="f3167"> That was eighteen years ago, an&#39; I&#39;ve never done a tap of anything else. </span>
      <span id="f3168"> But this job is the fiercest I ever had. </span>
      <span id="f3169">Ought to be one more man on it at least. </span>
      <span id="f3170"> We work to-morrow night. </span>
      <span id="f3171"> Always run the mangle Wednesday nights--collars an&#39; cuffs.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3172">Martin set his alarm, drew up to the table, and opened Fiske. </span>
      <span id="f3173"> He did not finish the first paragraph. </span>
      <span id="f3174"> The lines blurred and ran together and his head nodded. </span>
      <span id="f3175"> He walked up and down, batting his head savagely with his fists, but he could not conquer the numbness of sleep. </span>
      <span id="f3176"> He propped the book before him, and propped his eyelids with his fingers, and fell asleep with his eyes wide open. </span>
      <span id="f3177"> Then he surrendered, and, scarcely conscious of what he did, got off his clothes and into bed. </span>
      <span id="f3178"> He slept seven hours of heavy, animal-like sleep, and awoke by the alarm, feeling that he had not had enough.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3179">&#34;Doin&#39; much readin&#39;?&#34; Joe asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3180">Martin shook his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3181">&#34;Never mind. </span>
      <span id="f3182"> We got to run the mangle to-night, but Thursday we&#39;ll knock off at six. </span>
      <span id="f3183"> That&#39;ll give you a chance.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3184">Martin washed woollens that day, by hand, in a large barrel, with strong soft-soap, by means of a hub from a wagon wheel, mounted on a plunger- pole that was attached to a spring-pole overhead.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3185">&#34;My invention,&#34; Joe said proudly. </span>
      <span id="f3186"> &#34;Beats a washboard an&#39; your knuckles, and, besides, it saves at least fifteen minutes in the week, an&#39; fifteen minutes ain&#39;t to be sneezed at in this shebang.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3187">Running the collars and cuffs through the mangle was also Joe&#39;s idea. </span>
      <span id="f3188">That night, while they toiled on under the electric lights, he explained it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3189">&#34;Something no laundry ever does, except this one. </span>
      <span id="f3190"> An&#39; I got to do it if I&#39;m goin&#39; to get done Saturday afternoon at three o&#39;clock. </span>
      <span id="f3191"> But I know how, an&#39; that&#39;s the difference. </span>
      <span id="f3192"> Got to have right heat, right pressure, and run &#39;em through three times. </span>
      <span id="f3193"> Look at that!&#34;  He held a cuff aloft. </span>
      <span id="f3194">&#34;Couldn&#39;t do it better by hand or on a tiler.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3195">Thursday, Joe was in a rage. </span>
      <span id="f3196"> A bundle of extra &#34;fancy starch&#34; had come in.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3197">&#34;I&#39;m goin&#39; to quit,&#34; he announced. </span>
      <span id="f3198"> &#34;I won&#39;t stand for it. </span>
      <span id="f3199"> I&#39;m goin&#39; to quit it cold. </span>
      <span id="f3200"> What&#39;s the good of me workin&#39; like a slave all week, a- savin&#39; minutes, an&#39; them a-comin&#39; an&#39; ringin&#39; in fancy-starch extras on me? </span>
      <span id="f3201"> This is a free country, an&#39; I&#39;m to tell that fat Dutchman what I think of him. </span>
      <span id="f3202"> An&#39; I won&#39;t tell &#39;m in French. </span>
      <span id="f3203"> Plain United States is good enough for me. </span>
      <span id="f3204"> Him a-ringin&#39; in fancy starch extras!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3205">&#34;We got to work to-night,&#34; he said the next moment, reversing his judgment and surrendering to fate.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3206">And Martin did no reading that night. </span>
      <span id="f3207"> He had seen no daily paper all week, and, strangely to him, felt no desire to see one. </span>
      <span id="f3208"> He was not interested in the news. </span>
      <span id="f3209"> He was too tired and jaded to be interested in anything, though he planned to leave Saturday afternoon, if they finished at three, and ride on his wheel to Oakland. </span>
      <span id="f3210"> It was seventy miles, and the same distance back on Sunday afternoon would leave him anything but rested for the second week&#39;s work. </span>
      <span id="f3211"> It would have been easier to go on the train, but the round trip was two dollars and a half, and he was intent on saving money.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>