<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f3212">CHAPTER XVII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f3213">Martin learned to do many things. </span>
      <span id="f3214"> In the course of the first week, in one afternoon, he and Joe accounted for the two hundred white shirts. </span>
      <span id="f3215"> Joe ran the tiler, a machine wherein a hot iron was hooked on a steel string which furnished the pressure. </span>
      <span id="f3216"> By this means he ironed the yoke, wristbands, and neckband, setting the latter at right angles to the shirt, and put the glossy finish on the bosom. </span>
      <span id="f3217"> As fast as he finished them, he flung the shirts on a rack between him and Martin, who caught them up and &#34;backed&#34; them. </span>
      <span id="f3218"> This task consisted of ironing all the unstarched portions of the shirts.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3219">It was exhausting work, carried on, hour after hour, at top speed. </span>
      <span id="f3220"> Out on the broad verandas of the hotel, men and women, in cool white, sipped iced drinks and kept their circulation down. </span>
      <span id="f3221"> But in the laundry the air was sizzling. </span>
      <span id="f3222"> The huge stove roared red hot and white hot, while the irons, moving over the damp cloth, sent up clouds of steam. </span>
      <span id="f3223"> The heat of these irons was different from that used by housewives. </span>
      <span id="f3224"> An iron that stood the ordinary test of a wet finger was too cold for Joe and Martin, and such test was useless. </span>
      <span id="f3225"> They went wholly by holding the irons close to their cheeks, gauging the heat by some secret mental process that Martin admired but could not understand. </span>
      <span id="f3226"> When the fresh irons proved too hot, they hooked them on iron rods and dipped them into cold water. </span>
      <span id="f3227"> This again required a precise and subtle judgment. </span>
      <span id="f3228"> A fraction of a second too long in the water and the fine and silken edge of the proper heat was lost, and Martin found time to marvel at the accuracy he developed--an automatic accuracy, founded upon criteria that were machine-like and unerring.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3229">But there was little time in which to marvel. </span>
      <span id="f3230"> All Martin&#39;s consciousness was concentrated in the work. </span>
      <span id="f3231"> Ceaselessly active, head and hand, an intelligent machine, all that constituted him a man was devoted to furnishing that intelligence. </span>
      <span id="f3232"> There was no room in his brain for the universe and its mighty problems. </span>
      <span id="f3233"> All the broad and spacious corridors of his mind were closed and hermetically sealed. </span>
      <span id="f3234"> The echoing chamber of his soul was a narrow room, a conning tower, whence were directed his arm and shoulder muscles, his ten nimble fingers, and the swift-moving iron along its steaming path in broad, sweeping strokes, just so many strokes and no more, just so far with each stroke and not a fraction of an inch farther, rushing along interminable sleeves, sides, backs, and tails, and tossing the finished shirts, without rumpling, upon the receiving frame. </span>
      <span id="f3235">And even as his hurrying soul tossed, it was reaching for another shirt. </span>
      <span id="f3236">This went on, hour after hour, while outside all the world swooned under the overhead California sun. </span>
      <span id="f3237"> But there was no swooning in that superheated room. </span>
      <span id="f3238"> The cool guests on the verandas needed clean linen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3239">The sweat poured from Martin. </span>
      <span id="f3240"> He drank enormous quantities of water, but so great was the heat of the day and of his exertions, that the water sluiced through the interstices of his flesh and out at all his pores. </span>
      <span id="f3241">Always, at sea, except at rare intervals, the work he performed had given him ample opportunity to commune with himself. </span>
      <span id="f3242"> The master of the ship had been lord of Martin&#39;s time; but here the manager of the hotel was lord of Martin&#39;s thoughts as well. </span>
      <span id="f3243"> He had no thoughts save for the nerve- racking, body-destroying toil. </span>
      <span id="f3244"> Outside of that it was impossible to think. </span>
      <span id="f3245"> He did not know that he loved Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f3246"> She did not even exist, for his driven soul had no time to remember her. </span>
      <span id="f3247"> It was only when he crawled to bed at night, or to breakfast in the morning, that she asserted herself to him in fleeting memories.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3248">&#34;This is hell, ain&#39;t it?&#34; Joe remarked once.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3249">Martin nodded, but felt a rasp of irritation. </span>
      <span id="f3250"> The statement had been obvious and unnecessary. </span>
      <span id="f3251"> They did not talk while they worked. </span>
      <span id="f3252">Conversation threw them out of their stride, as it did this time, compelling Martin to miss a stroke of his iron and to make two extra motions before he caught his stride again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3253">On Friday morning the washer ran. </span>
      <span id="f3254"> Twice a week they had to put through hotel linen,--the sheets, pillow-slips, spreads, table-cloths, and napkins. </span>
      <span id="f3255"> This finished, they buckled down to &#34;fancy starch.&#34;  It was slow work, fastidious and delicate, and Martin did not learn it so readily. </span>
      <span id="f3256"> Besides, he could not take chances. </span>
      <span id="f3257"> Mistakes were disastrous.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3258">&#34;See that,&#34; Joe said, holding up a filmy corset-cover that he could have crumpled from view in one hand. </span>
      <span id="f3259"> &#34;Scorch that an&#39; it&#39;s twenty dollars out of your wages.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3260">So Martin did not scorch that, and eased down on his muscular tension, though nervous tension rose higher than ever, and he listened sympathetically to the other&#39;s blasphemies as he toiled and suffered over the beautiful things that women wear when they do not have to do their own laundrying. </span>
      <span id="f3261"> &#34;Fancy starch&#34; was Martin&#39;s nightmare, and it was Joe&#39;s, too. </span>
      <span id="f3262"> It was &#34;fancy starch&#34; that robbed them of their hard-won minutes. </span>
      <span id="f3263">They toiled at it all day. </span>
      <span id="f3264"> At seven in the evening they broke off to run the hotel linen through the mangle. </span>
      <span id="f3265"> At ten o&#39;clock, while the hotel guests slept, the two laundrymen sweated on at &#34;fancy starch&#34; till midnight, till one, till two. </span>
      <span id="f3266"> At half-past two they knocked off.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3267">Saturday morning it was &#34;fancy starch,&#34; and odds and ends, and at three in the afternoon the week&#39;s work was done.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3268">&#34;You ain&#39;t a-goin&#39; to ride them seventy miles into Oakland on top of this?&#34; Joe demanded, as they sat on the stairs and took a triumphant smoke.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3269">&#34;Got to,&#34; was the answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3270">&#34;What are you goin&#39; for?--a girl?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3271">&#34;No; to save two and a half on the railroad ticket. </span>
      <span id="f3272"> I want to renew some books at the library.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3273">&#34;Why don&#39;t you send &#39;em down an&#39; up by express? </span>
      <span id="f3274"> That&#39;ll cost only a quarter each way.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3275">Martin considered it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3276">&#34;An&#39; take a rest to-morrow,&#34; the other urged. </span>
      <span id="f3277"> &#34;You need it. </span>
      <span id="f3278"> I know I do. </span>
      <span id="f3279"> I&#39;m plumb tuckered out.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3280">He looked it. </span>
      <span id="f3281"> Indomitable, never resting, fighting for seconds and minutes all week, circumventing delays and crushing down obstacles, a fount of resistless energy, a high-driven human motor, a demon for work, now that he had accomplished the week&#39;s task he was in a state of collapse. </span>
      <span id="f3282"> He was worn and haggard, and his handsome face drooped in lean exhaustion. </span>
      <span id="f3283"> He pulled his cigarette spiritlessly, and his voice was peculiarly dead and monotonous. </span>
      <span id="f3284"> All the snap and fire had gone out of him. </span>
      <span id="f3285"> His triumph seemed a sorry one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3286">&#34;An&#39; next week we got to do it all over again,&#34; he said sadly. </span>
      <span id="f3287"> &#34;An&#39; what&#39;s the good of it all, hey? </span>
      <span id="f3288"> Sometimes I wish I was a hobo. </span>
      <span id="f3289"> They don&#39;t work, an&#39; they get their livin&#39;. </span>
      <span id="f3290"> Gee! </span>
      <span id="f3291"> I wish I had a glass of beer; but I can&#39;t get up the gumption to go down to the village an&#39; get it. </span>
      <span id="f3292"> You&#39;ll stay over, an&#39; send your books dawn by express, or else you&#39;re a damn fool.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3293">&#34;But what can I do here all day Sunday?&#34; Martin asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3294">&#34;Rest. </span>
      <span id="f3295"> You don&#39;t know how tired you are. </span>
      <span id="f3296"> Why, I&#39;m that tired Sunday I can&#39;t even read the papers. </span>
      <span id="f3297"> I was sick once--typhoid. </span>
      <span id="f3298"> In the hospital two months an&#39; a half. </span>
      <span id="f3299"> Didn&#39;t do a tap of work all that time. </span>
      <span id="f3300"> It was beautiful.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3301">&#34;It was beautiful,&#34; he repeated dreamily, a minute later.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3302">Martin took a bath, after which he found that the head laundryman had disappeared. </span>
      <span id="f3303"> Most likely he had gone for a glass of beer Martin decided, but the half-mile walk down to the village to find out seemed a long journey to him. </span>
      <span id="f3304"> He lay on his bed with his shoes off, trying to make up his mind. </span>
      <span id="f3305"> He did not reach out for a book. </span>
      <span id="f3306"> He was too tired to feel sleepy, and he lay, scarcely thinking, in a semi-stupor of weariness, until it was time for supper. </span>
      <span id="f3307"> Joe did not appear for that function, and when Martin heard the gardener remark that most likely he was ripping the slats off the bar, Martin understood. </span>
      <span id="f3308"> He went to bed immediately afterward, and in the morning decided that he was greatly rested. </span>
      <span id="f3309"> Joe being still absent, Martin procured a Sunday paper and lay down in a shady nook under the trees. </span>
      <span id="f3310"> The morning passed, he knew not how. </span>
      <span id="f3311"> He did not sleep, nobody disturbed him, and he did not finish the paper. </span>
      <span id="f3312"> He came back to it in the afternoon, after dinner, and fell asleep over it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3313">So passed Sunday, and Monday morning he was hard at work, sorting clothes, while Joe, a towel bound tightly around his head, with groans and blasphemies, was running the washer and mixing soft-soap.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3314">&#34;I simply can&#39;t help it,&#34; he explained. </span>
      <span id="f3315"> &#34;I got to drink when Saturday night comes around.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3316">Another week passed, a great battle that continued under the electric lights each night and that culminated on Saturday afternoon at three o&#39;clock, when Joe tasted his moment of wilted triumph and then drifted down to the village to forget. </span>
      <span id="f3317"> Martin&#39;s Sunday was the same as before. </span>
      <span id="f3318">He slept in the shade of the trees, toiled aimlessly through the newspaper, and spent long hours lying on his back, doing nothing, thinking nothing. </span>
      <span id="f3319"> He was too dazed to think, though he was aware that he did not like himself. </span>
      <span id="f3320"> He was self-repelled, as though he had undergone some degradation or was intrinsically foul. </span>
      <span id="f3321"> All that was god-like in him was blotted out. </span>
      <span id="f3322"> The spur of ambition was blunted; he had no vitality with which to feel the prod of it. </span>
      <span id="f3323"> He was dead. </span>
      <span id="f3324"> His soul seemed dead. </span>
      <span id="f3325">He was a beast, a work-beast. </span>
      <span id="f3326"> He saw no beauty in the sunshine sifting down through the green leaves, nor did the azure vault of the sky whisper as of old and hint of cosmic vastness and secrets trembling to disclosure. </span>
      <span id="f3327"> Life was intolerably dull and stupid, and its taste was bad in his mouth. </span>
      <span id="f3328"> A black screen was drawn across his mirror of inner vision, and fancy lay in a darkened sick-room where entered no ray of light. </span>
      <span id="f3329"> He envied Joe, down in the village, rampant, tearing the slats off the bar, his brain gnawing with maggots, exulting in maudlin ways over maudlin things, fantastically and gloriously drunk and forgetful of Monday morning and the week of deadening toil to come.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3330">A third week went by, and Martin loathed himself, and loathed life. </span>
      <span id="f3331"> He was oppressed by a sense of failure. </span>
      <span id="f3332"> There was reason for the editors refusing his stuff. </span>
      <span id="f3333"> He could see that clearly now, and laugh at himself and the dreams he had dreamed. </span>
      <span id="f3334"> Ruth returned his &#34;Sea Lyrics&#34; by mail. </span>
      <span id="f3335">He read her letter apathetically. </span>
      <span id="f3336"> She did her best to say how much she liked them and that they were beautiful. </span>
      <span id="f3337"> But she could not lie, and she could not disguise the truth from herself. </span>
      <span id="f3338"> She knew they were failures, and he read her disapproval in every perfunctory and unenthusiastic line of her letter. </span>
      <span id="f3339"> And she was right. </span>
      <span id="f3340"> He was firmly convinced of it as he read the poems over. </span>
      <span id="f3341"> Beauty and wonder had departed from him, and as he read the poems he caught himself puzzling as to what he had had in mind when he wrote them. </span>
      <span id="f3342"> His audacities of phrase struck him as grotesque, his felicities of expression were monstrosities, and everything was absurd, unreal, and impossible. </span>
      <span id="f3343"> He would have burned the &#34;Sea Lyrics&#34; on the spot, had his will been strong enough to set them aflame. </span>
      <span id="f3344"> There was the engine-room, but the exertion of carrying them to the furnace was not worth while. </span>
      <span id="f3345"> All his exertion was used in washing other persons&#39; clothes. </span>
      <span id="f3346"> He did not have any left for private affairs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3347">He resolved that when Sunday came he would pull himself together and answer Ruth&#39;s letter. </span>
      <span id="f3348"> But Saturday afternoon, after work was finished and he had taken a bath, the desire to forget overpowered him. </span>
      <span id="f3349"> &#34;I guess I&#39;ll go down and see how Joe&#39;s getting on,&#34; was the way he put it to himself; and in the same moment he knew that he lied. </span>
      <span id="f3350"> But he did not have the energy to consider the lie. </span>
      <span id="f3351"> If he had had the energy, he would have refused to consider the lie, because he wanted to forget. </span>
      <span id="f3352"> He started for the village slowly and casually, increasing his pace in spite of himself as he neared the saloon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3353">&#34;I thought you was on the water-wagon,&#34; was Joe&#39;s greeting.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3354">Martin did not deign to offer excuses, but called for whiskey, filling his own glass brimming before he passed the bottle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3355">&#34;Don&#39;t take all night about it,&#34; he said roughly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3356">The other was dawdling with the bottle, and Martin refused to wait for him, tossing the glass off in a gulp and refilling it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3357">&#34;Now, I can wait for you,&#34; he said grimly; &#34;but hurry up.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3358">Joe hurried, and they drank together.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3359">&#34;The work did it, eh?&#34; Joe queried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3360">Martin refused to discuss the matter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3361">&#34;It&#39;s fair hell, I know,&#34; the other went on, &#34;but I kind of hate to see you come off the wagon, Mart. </span>
      <span id="f3362"> Well, here&#39;s how!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3363">Martin drank on silently, biting out his orders and invitations and awing the barkeeper, an effeminate country youngster with watery blue eyes and hair parted in the middle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3364">&#34;It&#39;s something scandalous the way they work us poor devils,&#34; Joe was remarking. </span>
      <span id="f3365"> &#34;If I didn&#39;t bowl up, I&#39;d break loose an&#39; burn down the shebang. </span>
      <span id="f3366"> My bowlin&#39; up is all that saves &#39;em, I can tell you that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3367">But Martin made no answer. </span>
      <span id="f3368"> A few more drinks, and in his brain he felt the maggots of intoxication beginning to crawl. </span>
      <span id="f3369"> Ah, it was living, the first breath of life he had breathed in three weeks. </span>
      <span id="f3370"> His dreams came back to him. </span>
      <span id="f3371"> Fancy came out of the darkened room and lured him on, a thing of flaming brightness. </span>
      <span id="f3372"> His mirror of vision was silver-clear, a flashing, dazzling palimpsest of imagery. </span>
      <span id="f3373"> Wonder and beauty walked with him, hand in hand, and all power was his. </span>
      <span id="f3374"> He tried to tell it to Joe, but Joe had visions of his own, infallible schemes whereby he would escape the slavery of laundry-work and become himself the owner of a great steam laundry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3375">&#34;I tell yeh, Mart, they won&#39;t be no kids workin&#39; in my laundry--not on yer life. </span>
      <span id="f3376"> An&#39; they won&#39;t be no workin&#39; a livin&#39; soul after six P.M. </span>
      <span id="f3377"> You hear me talk! </span>
      <span id="f3378"> They&#39;ll be machinery enough an&#39; hands enough to do it all in decent workin&#39; hours, an&#39; Mart, s&#39;help me, I&#39;ll make yeh superintendent of the shebang--the whole of it, all of it. </span>
      <span id="f3379"> Now here&#39;s the scheme. </span>
      <span id="f3380"> I get on the water-wagon an&#39; save my money for two years--save an&#39; then--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3381">But Martin turned away, leaving him to tell it to the barkeeper, until that worthy was called away to furnish drinks to two farmers who, coming in, accepted Martin&#39;s invitation. </span>
      <span id="f3382"> Martin dispensed royal largess, inviting everybody up, farm-hands, a stableman, and the gardener&#39;s assistant from the hotel, the barkeeper, and the furtive hobo who slid in like a shadow and like a shadow hovered at the end of the bar.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>