<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XVIII</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f3383">CHAPTER XVIII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f3384">Monday morning, Joe groaned over the first truck load of clothes to the washer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3385">&#34;I say,&#34; he began.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3386">&#34;Don&#39;t talk to me,&#34; Martin snarled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3387">&#34;I&#39;m sorry, Joe,&#34; he said at noon, when they knocked off for dinner.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3388">Tears came into the other&#39;s eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3389">&#34;That&#39;s all right, old man,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f3390"> &#34;We&#39;re in hell, an&#39; we can&#39;t help ourselves. </span>
      <span id="f3391"> An&#39;, you know, I kind of like you a whole lot. </span>
      <span id="f3392"> That&#39;s what made it--hurt. </span>
      <span id="f3393"> I cottoned to you from the first.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3394">Martin shook his hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3395">&#34;Let&#39;s quit,&#34; Joe suggested. </span>
      <span id="f3396"> &#34;Let&#39;s chuck it, an&#39; go hoboin&#39;. </span>
      <span id="f3397"> I ain&#39;t never tried it, but it must be dead easy. </span>
      <span id="f3398"> An&#39; nothin&#39; to do. </span>
      <span id="f3399"> Just think of it, nothin&#39; to do. </span>
      <span id="f3400"> I was sick once, typhoid, in the hospital, an&#39; it was beautiful. </span>
      <span id="f3401"> I wish I&#39;d get sick again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3402">The week dragged on. </span>
      <span id="f3403"> The hotel was full, and extra &#34;fancy starch&#34; poured in upon them. </span>
      <span id="f3404"> They performed prodigies of valor. </span>
      <span id="f3405"> They fought late each night under the electric lights, bolted their meals, and even got in a half hour&#39;s work before breakfast. </span>
      <span id="f3406"> Martin no longer took his cold baths. </span>
      <span id="f3407">Every moment was drive, drive, drive, and Joe was the masterful shepherd of moments, herding them carefully, never losing one, counting them over like a miser counting gold, working on in a frenzy, toil-mad, a feverish machine, aided ably by that other machine that thought of itself as once having been one Martin Eden, a man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3408">But it was only at rare moments that Martin was able to think. </span>
      <span id="f3409"> The house of thought was closed, its windows boarded up, and he was its shadowy caretaker. </span>
      <span id="f3410"> He was a shadow. </span>
      <span id="f3411"> Joe was right. </span>
      <span id="f3412"> They were both shadows, and this was the unending limbo of toil. </span>
      <span id="f3413"> Or was it a dream? </span>
      <span id="f3414"> Sometimes, in the steaming, sizzling heat, as he swung the heavy irons back and forth over the white garments, it came to him that it was a dream. </span>
      <span id="f3415"> In a short while, or maybe after a thousand years or so, he would awake, in his little room with the ink-stained table, and take up his writing where he had left off the day before. </span>
      <span id="f3416"> Or maybe that was a dream, too, and the awakening would be the changing of the watches, when he would drop down out of his bunk in the lurching forecastle and go up on deck, under the tropic stars, and take the wheel and feel the cool tradewind blowing through his flesh.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3417">Came Saturday and its hollow victory at three o&#39;clock.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3418">&#34;Guess I&#39;ll go down an&#39; get a glass of beer,&#34; Joe said, in the queer, monotonous tones that marked his week-end collapse.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3419">Martin seemed suddenly to wake up. </span>
      <span id="f3420"> He opened the kit bag and oiled his wheel, putting graphite on the chain and adjusting the bearings. </span>
      <span id="f3421"> Joe was halfway down to the saloon when Martin passed by, bending low over the handle-bars, his legs driving the ninety-six gear with rhythmic strength, his face set for seventy miles of road and grade and dust. </span>
      <span id="f3422"> He slept in Oakland that night, and on Sunday covered the seventy miles back. </span>
      <span id="f3423"> And on Monday morning, weary, he began the new week&#39;s work, but he had kept sober.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3424">A fifth week passed, and a sixth, during which he lived and toiled as a machine, with just a spark of something more in him, just a glimmering bit of soul, that compelled him, at each week-end, to scorch off the hundred and forty miles. </span>
      <span id="f3425"> But this was not rest. </span>
      <span id="f3426"> It was super-machinelike, and it helped to crush out the glimmering bit of soul that was all that was left him from former life. </span>
      <span id="f3427"> At the end of the seventh week, without intending it, too weak to resist, he drifted down to the village with Joe and drowned life and found life until Monday morning.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3428">Again, at the week-ends, he ground out the one hundred and forty miles, obliterating the numbness of too great exertion by the numbness of still greater exertion. </span>
      <span id="f3429"> At the end of three months he went down a third time to the village with Joe. </span>
      <span id="f3430"> He forgot, and lived again, and, living, he saw, in clear illumination, the beast he was making of himself--not by the drink, but by the work. </span>
      <span id="f3431"> The drink was an effect, not a cause. </span>
      <span id="f3432"> It followed inevitably upon the work, as the night follows upon the day. </span>
      <span id="f3433"> Not by becoming a toil-beast could he win to the heights, was the message the whiskey whispered to him, and he nodded approbation. </span>
      <span id="f3434"> The whiskey was wise. </span>
      <span id="f3435"> It told secrets on itself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3436">He called for paper and pencil, and for drinks all around, and while they drank his very good health, he clung to the bar and scribbled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3437">&#34;A telegram, Joe,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f3438"> &#34;Read it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3439">Joe read it with a drunken, quizzical leer. </span>
      <span id="f3440"> But what he read seemed to sober him. </span>
      <span id="f3441"> He looked at the other reproachfully, tears oozing into his eyes and down his cheeks.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3442">&#34;You ain&#39;t goin&#39; back on me, Mart?&#34; he queried hopelessly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3443">Martin nodded, and called one of the loungers to him to take the message to the telegraph office.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3444">&#34;Hold on,&#34; Joe muttered thickly. </span>
      <span id="f3445"> &#34;Lemme think.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3446">He held on to the bar, his legs wobbling under him, Martin&#39;s arm around him and supporting him, while he thought.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3447">&#34;Make that two laundrymen,&#34; he said abruptly. </span>
      <span id="f3448"> &#34;Here, lemme fix it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3449">&#34;What are you quitting for?&#34; Martin demanded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3450">&#34;Same reason as you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3451">&#34;But I&#39;m going to sea. </span>
      <span id="f3452"> You can&#39;t do that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3453">&#34;Nope,&#34; was the answer, &#34;but I can hobo all right, all right.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3454">Martin looked at him searchingly for a moment, then cried:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3455">&#34;By God, I think you&#39;re right! </span>
      <span id="f3456"> Better a hobo than a beast of toil. </span>
      <span id="f3457"> Why, man, you&#39;ll live. </span>
      <span id="f3458"> And that&#39;s more than you ever did before.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3459">&#34;I was in hospital, once,&#34; Joe corrected. </span>
      <span id="f3460"> &#34;It was beautiful. </span>
      <span id="f3461"> Typhoid--did I tell you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3462">While Martin changed the telegram to &#34;two laundrymen,&#34; Joe went on:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3463">&#34;I never wanted to drink when I was in hospital. </span>
      <span id="f3464"> Funny, ain&#39;t it? </span>
      <span id="f3465"> But when I&#39;ve ben workin&#39; like a slave all week, I just got to bowl up. </span>
      <span id="f3466"> Ever noticed that cooks drink like hell?--an&#39; bakers, too? </span>
      <span id="f3467"> It&#39;s the work. </span>
      <span id="f3468">They&#39;ve sure got to. </span>
      <span id="f3469"> Here, lemme pay half of that telegram.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3470">&#34;I&#39;ll shake you for it,&#34; Martin offered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3471">&#34;Come on, everybody drink,&#34; Joe called, as they rattled the dice and rolled them out on the damp bar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3472">Monday morning Joe was wild with anticipation. </span>
      <span id="f3473"> He did not mind his aching head, nor did he take interest in his work. </span>
      <span id="f3474"> Whole herds of moments stole away and were lost while their careless shepherd gazed out of the window at the sunshine and the trees.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3475">&#34;Just look at it!&#34; he cried. </span>
      <span id="f3476"> &#34;An&#39; it&#39;s all mine! </span>
      <span id="f3477"> It&#39;s free. </span>
      <span id="f3478"> I can lie down under them trees an&#39; sleep for a thousan&#39; years if I want to. </span>
      <span id="f3479"> Aw, come on, Mart, let&#39;s chuck it. </span>
      <span id="f3480"> What&#39;s the good of waitin&#39; another moment. </span>
      <span id="f3481"> That&#39;s the land of nothin&#39; to do out there, an&#39; I got a ticket for it--an&#39; it ain&#39;t no return ticket, b&#39;gosh!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3482">A few minutes later, filling the truck with soiled clothes for the washer, Joe spied the hotel manager&#39;s shirt. </span>
      <span id="f3483"> He knew its mark, and with a sudden glorious consciousness of freedom he threw it on the floor and stamped on it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3484">&#34;I wish you was in it, you pig-headed Dutchman!&#34; he shouted. </span>
      <span id="f3485"> &#34;In it, an&#39; right there where I&#39;ve got you! </span>
      <span id="f3486"> Take that! </span>
      <span id="f3487">an&#39; that! </span>
      <span id="f3488">an&#39; that! </span>
      <span id="f3489">damn you! </span>
      <span id="f3490">Hold me back, somebody! </span>
      <span id="f3491"> Hold me back!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3492">Martin laughed and held him to his work. </span>
      <span id="f3493"> On Tuesday night the new laundrymen arrived, and the rest of the week was spent breaking them into the routine. </span>
      <span id="f3494"> Joe sat around and explained his system, but he did no more work.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3495">&#34;Not a tap,&#34; he announced. </span>
      <span id="f3496"> &#34;Not a tap. </span>
      <span id="f3497"> They can fire me if they want to, but if they do, I&#39;ll quit. </span>
      <span id="f3498"> No more work in mine, thank you kindly. </span>
      <span id="f3499">Me for the freight cars an&#39; the shade under the trees. </span>
      <span id="f3500"> Go to it, you slaves! </span>
      <span id="f3501"> That&#39;s right. </span>
      <span id="f3502"> Slave an&#39; sweat! </span>
      <span id="f3503"> Slave an&#39; sweat! </span>
      <span id="f3504"> An&#39; when you&#39;re dead, you&#39;ll rot the same as me, an&#39; what&#39;s it matter how you live?--eh? </span>
      <span id="f3505"> Tell me that--what&#39;s it matter in the long run?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3506">On Saturday they drew their pay and came to the parting of the ways.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3507">&#34;They ain&#39;t no use in me askin&#39; you to change your mind an&#39; hit the road with me?&#34; Joe asked hopelessly:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3508">Martin shook his head. </span>
      <span id="f3509"> He was standing by his wheel, ready to start. </span>
      <span id="f3510">They shook hands, and Joe held on to his for a moment, as he said:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3511">&#34;I&#39;m goin&#39; to see you again, Mart, before you an&#39; me die. </span>
      <span id="f3512"> That&#39;s straight dope. </span>
      <span id="f3513"> I feel it in my bones. </span>
      <span id="f3514"> Good-by, Mart, an&#39; be good. </span>
      <span id="f3515"> I like you like hell, you know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3516">He stood, a forlorn figure, in the middle of the road, watching until Martin turned a bend and was gone from sight.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3517">&#34;He&#39;s a good Indian, that boy,&#34; he muttered. </span>
      <span id="f3518"> &#34;A good Indian.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3519">Then he plodded down the road himself, to the water tank, where half a dozen empties lay on a side-track waiting for the up freight.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>