<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f3520">CHAPTER XIX</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f3521">Ruth and her family were home again, and Martin, returned to Oakland, saw much of her. </span>
      <span id="f3522"> Having gained her degree, she was doing no more studying; and he, having worked all vitality out of his mind and body, was doing no writing. </span>
      <span id="f3523"> This gave them time for each other that they had never had before, and their intimacy ripened fast.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3524">At first, Martin had done nothing but rest. </span>
      <span id="f3525"> He had slept a great deal, and spent long hours musing and thinking and doing nothing. </span>
      <span id="f3526"> He was like one recovering from some terrible bout of hardship. </span>
      <span id="f3527"> The first signs of reawakening came when he discovered more than languid interest in the daily paper. </span>
      <span id="f3528"> Then he began to read again--light novels, and poetry; and after several days more he was head over heels in his long-neglected Fiske. </span>
      <span id="f3529"> His splendid body and health made new vitality, and he possessed all the resiliency and rebound of youth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3530">Ruth showed her disappointment plainly when he announced that he was going to sea for another voyage as soon as he was well rested.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3531">&#34;Why do you want to do that?&#34; she asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3532">&#34;Money,&#34; was the answer. </span>
      <span id="f3533"> &#34;I&#39;ll have to lay in a supply for my next attack on the editors. </span>
      <span id="f3534"> Money is the sinews of war, in my case--money and patience.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3535">&#34;But if all you wanted was money, why didn&#39;t you stay in the laundry?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3536">&#34;Because the laundry was making a beast of me. </span>
      <span id="f3537"> Too much work of that sort drives to drink.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3538">She stared at him with horror in her eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3539">&#34;Do you mean--?&#34; she quavered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3540">It would have been easy for him to get out of it; but his natural impulse was for frankness, and he remembered his old resolve to be frank, no matter what happened.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3541">&#34;Yes,&#34; he answered. </span>
      <span id="f3542"> &#34;Just that. </span>
      <span id="f3543"> Several times.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3544">She shivered and drew away from him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3545">&#34;No man that I have ever known did that--ever did that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3546">&#34;Then they never worked in the laundry at Shelly Hot Springs,&#34; he laughed bitterly. </span>
      <span id="f3547"> &#34;Toil is a good thing. </span>
      <span id="f3548"> It is necessary for human health, so all the preachers say, and Heaven knows I&#39;ve never been afraid of it. </span>
      <span id="f3549"> But there is such a thing as too much of a good thing, and the laundry up there is one of them. </span>
      <span id="f3550"> And that&#39;s why I&#39;m going to sea one more voyage. </span>
      <span id="f3551">It will be my last, I think, for when I come back, I shall break into the magazines. </span>
      <span id="f3552"> I am certain of it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3553">She was silent, unsympathetic, and he watched her moodily, realizing how impossible it was for her to understand what he had been through.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3554">&#34;Some day I shall write it up--&#39;The Degradation of Toil&#39; or the &#39;Psychology of Drink in the Working-class,&#39; or something like that for a title.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3555">Never, since the first meeting, had they seemed so far apart as that day. </span>
      <span id="f3556">His confession, told in frankness, with the spirit of revolt behind, had repelled her. </span>
      <span id="f3557"> But she was more shocked by the repulsion itself than by the cause of it. </span>
      <span id="f3558"> It pointed out to her how near she had drawn to him, and once accepted, it paved the way for greater intimacy. </span>
      <span id="f3559"> Pity, too, was aroused, and innocent, idealistic thoughts of reform. </span>
      <span id="f3560"> She would save this raw young man who had come so far. </span>
      <span id="f3561"> She would save him from the curse of his early environment, and she would save him from himself in spite of himself. </span>
      <span id="f3562"> And all this affected her as a very noble state of consciousness; nor did she dream that behind it and underlying it were the jealousy and desire of love.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3563">They rode on their wheels much in the delightful fall weather, and out in the hills they read poetry aloud, now one and now the other, noble, uplifting poetry that turned one&#39;s thoughts to higher things. </span>
      <span id="f3564">Renunciation, sacrifice, patience, industry, and high endeavor were the principles she thus indirectly preached--such abstractions being objectified in her mind by her father, and Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3565">Butler, and by Andrew Carnegie, who, from a poor immigrant boy had arisen to be the book-giver of the world. </span>
      <span id="f3566"> All of which was appreciated and enjoyed by Martin. </span>
      <span id="f3567"> He followed her mental processes more clearly now, and her soul was no longer the sealed wonder it had been. </span>
      <span id="f3568"> He was on terms of intellectual equality with her. </span>
      <span id="f3569"> But the points of disagreement did not affect his love. </span>
      <span id="f3570"> His love was more ardent than ever, for he loved her for what she was, and even her physical frailty was an added charm in his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f3571"> He read of sickly Elizabeth Barrett, who for years had not placed her feet upon the ground, until that day of flame when she eloped with Browning and stood upright, upon the earth, under the open sky; and what Browning had done for her, Martin decided he could do for Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f3572"> But first, she must love him. </span>
      <span id="f3573"> The rest would be easy. </span>
      <span id="f3574"> He would give her strength and health. </span>
      <span id="f3575"> And he caught glimpses of their life, in the years to come, wherein, against a background of work and comfort and general well-being, he saw himself and Ruth reading and discussing poetry, she propped amid a multitude of cushions on the ground while she read aloud to him. </span>
      <span id="f3576"> This was the key to the life they would live. </span>
      <span id="f3577"> And always he saw that particular picture. </span>
      <span id="f3578"> Sometimes it was she who leaned against him while he read, one arm about her, her head upon his shoulder. </span>
      <span id="f3579"> Sometimes they pored together over the printed pages of beauty. </span>
      <span id="f3580"> Then, too, she loved nature, and with generous imagination he changed the scene of their reading--sometimes they read in closed-in valleys with precipitous walls, or in high mountain meadows, and, again, down by the gray sand-dunes with a wreath of billows at their feet, or afar on some volcanic tropic isle where waterfalls descended and became mist, reaching the sea in vapor veils that swayed and shivered to every vagrant wisp of wind. </span>
      <span id="f3581"> But always, in the foreground, lords of beauty and eternally reading and sharing, lay he and Ruth, and always in the background that was beyond the background of nature, dim and hazy, were work and success and money earned that made them free of the world and all its treasures.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3582">&#34;I should recommend my little girl to be careful,&#34; her mother warned her one day.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3583">&#34;I know what you mean. </span>
      <span id="f3584"> But it is impossible. </span>
      <span id="f3585"> He is not--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3586">Ruth was blushing, but it was the blush of maidenhood called upon for the first time to discuss the sacred things of life with a mother held equally sacred.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3587">&#34;Your kind.&#34;  Her mother finished the sentence for her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3588">Ruth nodded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3589">&#34;I did not want to say it, but he is not. </span>
      <span id="f3590"> He is rough, brutal, strong--too strong. </span>
      <span id="f3591"> He has not--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3592">She hesitated and could not go on. </span>
      <span id="f3593"> It was a new experience, talking over such matters with her mother. </span>
      <span id="f3594"> And again her mother completed her thought for her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3595">&#34;He has not lived a clean life, is what you wanted to say.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3596">Again Ruth nodded, and again a blush mantled her face.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3597">&#34;It is just that,&#34; she said. </span>
      <span id="f3598"> &#34;It has not been his fault, but he has played much with--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3599">&#34;With pitch?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3600">&#34;Yes, with pitch. </span>
      <span id="f3601"> And he frightens me. </span>
      <span id="f3602"> Sometimes I am positively in terror of him, when he talks in that free and easy way of the things he has done--as if they did not matter. </span>
      <span id="f3603"> They do matter, don&#39;t they?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3604">They sat with their arms twined around each other, and in the pause her mother patted her hand and waited for her to go on.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3605">&#34;But I am interested in him dreadfully,&#34; she continued. </span>
      <span id="f3606"> &#34;In a way he is my protege. </span>
      <span id="f3607"> Then, too, he is my first boy friend--but not exactly friend; rather protege and friend combined. </span>
      <span id="f3608"> Sometimes, too, when he frightens me, it seems that he is a bulldog I have taken for a plaything, like some of the &#39;frat&#39; girls, and he is tugging hard, and showing his teeth, and threatening to break loose.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3609">Again her mother waited.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3610">&#34;He interests me, I suppose, like the bulldog. </span>
      <span id="f3611"> And there is much good in him, too; but there is much in him that I would not like in--in the other way. </span>
      <span id="f3612"> You see, I have been thinking. </span>
      <span id="f3613"> He swears, he smokes, he drinks, he has fought with his fists (he has told me so, and he likes it; he says so). </span>
      <span id="f3614"> He is all that a man should not be--a man I would want for my--&#34; her voice sank very low--&#34;husband. </span>
      <span id="f3615"> Then he is too strong. </span>
      <span id="f3616"> My prince must be tall, and slender, and dark--a graceful, bewitching prince. </span>
      <span id="f3617"> No, there is no danger of my failing in love with Martin Eden. </span>
      <span id="f3618"> It would be the worst fate that could befall me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3619">&#34;But it is not that that I spoke about,&#34; her mother equivocated. </span>
      <span id="f3620"> &#34;Have you thought about him? </span>
      <span id="f3621"> He is so ineligible in every way, you know, and suppose he should come to love you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3622">&#34;But he does--already,&#34; she cried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3623">&#34;It was to be expected,&#34; Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f3624">Morse said gently. </span>
      <span id="f3625"> &#34;How could it be otherwise with any one who knew you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3626">&#34;Olney hates me!&#34; she exclaimed passionately. </span>
      <span id="f3627"> &#34;And I hate Olney. </span>
      <span id="f3628"> I feel always like a cat when he is around. </span>
      <span id="f3629"> I feel that I must be nasty to him, and even when I don&#39;t happen to feel that way, why, he&#39;s nasty to me, anyway. </span>
      <span id="f3630"> But I am happy with Martin Eden. </span>
      <span id="f3631"> No one ever loved me before--no man, I mean, in that way. </span>
      <span id="f3632"> And it is sweet to be loved--that way. </span>
      <span id="f3633"> You know what I mean, mother dear. </span>
      <span id="f3634"> It is sweet to feel that you are really and truly a woman.&#34;  She buried her face in her mother&#39;s lap, sobbing. </span>
      <span id="f3635">&#34;You think I am dreadful, I know, but I am honest, and I tell you just how I feel.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3636">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f3637">Morse was strangely sad and happy. </span>
      <span id="f3638"> Her child-daughter, who was a bachelor of arts, was gone; but in her place was a woman-daughter. </span>
      <span id="f3639"> The experiment had succeeded. </span>
      <span id="f3640"> The strange void in Ruth&#39;s nature had been filled, and filled without danger or penalty. </span>
      <span id="f3641"> This rough sailor-fellow had been the instrument, and, though Ruth did not love him, he had made her conscious of her womanhood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3642">&#34;His hand trembles,&#34; Ruth was confessing, her face, for shame&#39;s sake, still buried. </span>
      <span id="f3643"> &#34;It is most amusing and ridiculous, but I feel sorry for him, too. </span>
      <span id="f3644"> And when his hands are too trembly, and his eyes too shiny, why, I lecture him about his life and the wrong way he is going about it to mend it. </span>
      <span id="f3645"> But he worships me, I know. </span>
      <span id="f3646"> His eyes and his hands do not lie. </span>
      <span id="f3647"> And it makes me feel grown-up, the thought of it, the very thought of it; and I feel that I am possessed of something that is by rights my own--that makes me like the other girls--and--and young women. </span>
      <span id="f3648"> And, then, too, I knew that I was not like them before, and I knew that it worried you. </span>
      <span id="f3649"> You thought you did not let me know that dear worry of yours, but I did, and I wanted to--&#39;to make good,&#39; as Martin Eden says.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3650">It was a holy hour for mother and daughter, and their eyes were wet as they talked on in the twilight, Ruth all white innocence and frankness, her mother sympathetic, receptive, yet calmly explaining and guiding.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3651">&#34;He is four years younger than you,&#34; she said. </span>
      <span id="f3652"> &#34;He has no place in the world. </span>
      <span id="f3653"> He has neither position nor salary. </span>
      <span id="f3654"> He is impractical. </span>
      <span id="f3655"> Loving you, he should, in the name of common sense, be doing something that would give him the right to marry, instead of paltering around with those stories of his and with childish dreams. </span>
      <span id="f3656"> Martin Eden, I am afraid, will never grow up. </span>
      <span id="f3657"> He does not take to responsibility and a man&#39;s work in the world like your father did, or like all our friends, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3658">Butler for one. </span>
      <span id="f3659"> Martin Eden, I am afraid, will never be a money-earner. </span>
      <span id="f3660"> And this world is so ordered that money is necessary to happiness--oh, no, not these swollen fortunes, but enough of money to permit of common comfort and decency. </span>
      <span id="f3661"> He--he has never spoken?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3662">&#34;He has not breathed a word. </span>
      <span id="f3663"> He has not attempted to; but if he did, I would not let him, because, you see, I do not love him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3664">&#34;I am glad of that. </span>
      <span id="f3665"> I should not care to see my daughter, my one daughter, who is so clean and pure, love a man like him. </span>
      <span id="f3666"> There are noble men in the world who are clean and true and manly. </span>
      <span id="f3667"> Wait for them. </span>
      <span id="f3668"> You will find one some day, and you will love him and be loved by him, and you will be happy with him as your father and I have been happy with each other. </span>
      <span id="f3669"> And there is one thing you must always carry in mind--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3670">&#34;Yes, mother.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3671">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f3672">Morse&#39;s voice was low and sweet as she said, &#34;And that is the children.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3673">&#34;I--have thought about them,&#34; Ruth confessed, remembering the wanton thoughts that had vexed her in the past, her face again red with maiden shame that she should be telling such things.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3674">&#34;And it is that, the children, that makes Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3675">Eden impossible,&#34; Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f3676">Morse went on incisively. </span>
      <span id="f3677"> &#34;Their heritage must be clean, and he is, I am afraid, not clean. </span>
      <span id="f3678"> Your father has told me of sailors&#39; lives, and--and you understand.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3679">Ruth pressed her mother&#39;s hand in assent, feeling that she really did understand, though her conception was of something vague, remote, and terrible that was beyond the scope of imagination.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3680">&#34;You know I do nothing without telling you,&#34; she began. </span>
      <span id="f3681"> &#34;--Only, sometimes you must ask me, like this time. </span>
      <span id="f3682"> I wanted to tell you, but I did not know how. </span>
      <span id="f3683"> It is false modesty, I know it is that, but you can make it easy for me. </span>
      <span id="f3684"> Sometimes, like this time, you must ask me, you must give me a chance.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3685">&#34;Why, mother, you are a woman, too!&#34; she cried exultantly, as they stood up, catching her mother&#39;s hands and standing erect, facing her in the twilight, conscious of a strangely sweet equality between them. </span>
      <span id="f3686"> &#34;I should never have thought of you in that way if we had not had this talk. </span>
      <span id="f3687">I had to learn that I was a woman to know that you were one, too.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3688">&#34;We are women together,&#34; her mother said, drawing her to her and kissing her. </span>
      <span id="f3689"> &#34;We are women together,&#34; she repeated, as they went out of the room, their arms around each other&#39;s waists, their hearts swelling with a new sense of companionship.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3690">&#34;Our little girl has become a woman,&#34; Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f3691">Morse said proudly to her husband an hour later.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3692">&#34;That means,&#34; he said, after a long look at his wife, &#34;that means she is in love.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3693">&#34;No, but that she is loved,&#34; was the smiling rejoinder. </span>
      <span id="f3694"> &#34;The experiment has succeeded. </span>
      <span id="f3695"> She is awakened at last.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3696">&#34;Then we&#39;ll have to get rid of him.&#34;  Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3697">Morse spoke briskly, in matter- of-fact, businesslike tones.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3698">But his wife shook her head. </span>
      <span id="f3699"> &#34;It will not be necessary. </span>
      <span id="f3700"> Ruth says he is going to sea in a few days. </span>
      <span id="f3701"> When he comes back, she will not be here. </span>
      <span id="f3702"> We will send her to Aunt Clara&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f3703"> And, besides, a year in the East, with the change in climate, people, ideas, and everything, is just the thing she needs.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>