<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f3860">CHAPTER XXI</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f3861">Came a beautiful fall day, warm and languid, palpitant with the hush of the changing season, a California Indian summer day, with hazy sun and wandering wisps of breeze that did not stir the slumber of the air. </span>
      <span id="f3862"> Filmy purple mists, that were not vapors but fabrics woven of color, hid in the recesses of the hills. </span>
      <span id="f3863"> San Francisco lay like a blur of smoke upon her heights. </span>
      <span id="f3864"> The intervening bay was a dull sheen of molten metal, whereon sailing craft lay motionless or drifted with the lazy tide. </span>
      <span id="f3865"> Far Tamalpais, barely seen in the silver haze, bulked hugely by the Golden Gate, the latter a pale gold pathway under the westering sun. </span>
      <span id="f3866"> Beyond, the Pacific, dim and vast, was raising on its sky-line tumbled cloud-masses that swept landward, giving warning of the first blustering breath of winter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3867">The erasure of summer was at hand. </span>
      <span id="f3868"> Yet summer lingered, fading and fainting among her hills, deepening the purple of her valleys, spinning a shroud of haze from waning powers and sated raptures, dying with the calm content of having lived and lived well. </span>
      <span id="f3869"> And among the hills, on their favorite knoll, Martin and Ruth sat side by side, their heads bent over the same pages, he reading aloud from the love-sonnets of the woman who had loved Browning as it is given to few men to be loved.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3870">But the reading languished. </span>
      <span id="f3871"> The spell of passing beauty all about them was too strong. </span>
      <span id="f3872"> The golden year was dying as it had lived, a beautiful and unrepentant voluptuary, and reminiscent rapture and content freighted heavily the air. </span>
      <span id="f3873"> It entered into them, dreamy and languorous, weakening the fibres of resolution, suffusing the face of morality, or of judgment, with haze and purple mist. </span>
      <span id="f3874"> Martin felt tender and melting, and from time to time warm glows passed over him. </span>
      <span id="f3875"> His head was very near to hers, and when wandering phantoms of breeze stirred her hair so that it touched his face, the printed pages swam before his eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3876">&#34;I don&#39;t believe you know a word of what you are reading,&#34; she said once when he had lost his place.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3877">He looked at her with burning eyes, and was on the verge of becoming awkward, when a retort came to his lips.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3878">&#34;I don&#39;t believe you know either. </span>
      <span id="f3879"> What was the last sonnet about?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3880">&#34;I don&#39;t know,&#34; she laughed frankly. </span>
      <span id="f3881"> &#34;I&#39;ve already forgotten. </span>
      <span id="f3882"> Don&#39;t let us read any more. </span>
      <span id="f3883"> The day is too beautiful.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3884">&#34;It will be our last in the hills for some time,&#34; he announced gravely. </span>
      <span id="f3885">&#34;There&#39;s a storm gathering out there on the sea-rim.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3886">The book slipped from his hands to the ground, and they sat idly and silently, gazing out over the dreamy bay with eyes that dreamed and did not see. </span>
      <span id="f3887"> Ruth glanced sidewise at his neck. </span>
      <span id="f3888"> She did not lean toward him. </span>
      <span id="f3889"> She was drawn by some force outside of herself and stronger than gravitation, strong as destiny. </span>
      <span id="f3890"> It was only an inch to lean, and it was accomplished without volition on her part. </span>
      <span id="f3891"> Her shoulder touched his as lightly as a butterfly touches a flower, and just as lightly was the counter-pressure. </span>
      <span id="f3892"> She felt his shoulder press hers, and a tremor run through him. </span>
      <span id="f3893"> Then was the time for her to draw back. </span>
      <span id="f3894"> But she had become an automaton. </span>
      <span id="f3895"> Her actions had passed beyond the control of her will--she never thought of control or will in the delicious madness that was upon her. </span>
      <span id="f3896"> His arm began to steal behind her and around her. </span>
      <span id="f3897"> She waited its slow progress in a torment of delight. </span>
      <span id="f3898"> She waited, she knew not for what, panting, with dry, burning lips, a leaping pulse, and a fever of expectancy in all her blood. </span>
      <span id="f3899"> The girdling arm lifted higher and drew her toward him, drew her slowly and caressingly. </span>
      <span id="f3900"> She could wait no longer. </span>
      <span id="f3901">With a tired sigh, and with an impulsive movement all her own, unpremeditated, spasmodic, she rested her head upon his breast. </span>
      <span id="f3902"> His head bent over swiftly, and, as his lips approached, hers flew to meet them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3903">This must be love, she thought, in the one rational moment that was vouchsafed her. </span>
      <span id="f3904"> If it was not love, it was too shameful. </span>
      <span id="f3905"> It could be nothing else than love. </span>
      <span id="f3906"> She loved the man whose arms were around her and whose lips were pressed to hers. </span>
      <span id="f3907"> She pressed more, tightly to him, with a snuggling movement of her body. </span>
      <span id="f3908"> And a moment later, tearing herself half out of his embrace, suddenly and exultantly she reached up and placed both hands upon Martin Eden&#39;s sunburnt neck. </span>
      <span id="f3909"> So exquisite was the pang of love and desire fulfilled that she uttered a low moan, relaxed her hands, and lay half-swooning in his arms.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3910">Not a word had been spoken, and not a word was spoken for a long time. </span>
      <span id="f3911">Twice he bent and kissed her, and each time her lips met his shyly and her body made its happy, nestling movement. </span>
      <span id="f3912"> She clung to him, unable to release herself, and he sat, half supporting her in his arms, as he gazed with unseeing eyes at the blur of the great city across the bay. </span>
      <span id="f3913"> For once there were no visions in his brain. </span>
      <span id="f3914"> Only colors and lights and glows pulsed there, warm as the day and warm as his love. </span>
      <span id="f3915"> He bent over her. </span>
      <span id="f3916"> She was speaking.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3917">&#34;When did you love me?&#34; she whispered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3918">&#34;From the first, the very first, the first moment I laid eye on you. </span>
      <span id="f3919"> I was mad for love of you then, and in all the time that has passed since then I have only grown the madder. </span>
      <span id="f3920"> I am maddest, now, dear. </span>
      <span id="f3921"> I am almost a lunatic, my head is so turned with joy.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3922">&#34;I am glad I am a woman, Martin--dear,&#34; she said, after a long sigh.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3923">He crushed her in his arms again and again, and then asked:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3924">&#34;And you? </span>
      <span id="f3925"> When did you first know?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3926">&#34;Oh, I knew it all the time, almost, from the first.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3927">&#34;And I have been as blind as a bat!&#34; he cried, a ring of vexation in his voice. </span>
      <span id="f3928"> &#34;I never dreamed it until just how, when I--when I kissed you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3929">&#34;I didn&#39;t mean that.&#34;  She drew herself partly away and looked at him. </span>
      <span id="f3930"> &#34;I meant I knew you loved almost from the first.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3931">&#34;And you?&#34; he demanded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3932">&#34;It came to me suddenly.&#34;  She was speaking very slowly, her eyes warm and fluttery and melting, a soft flush on her cheeks that did not go away. </span>
      <span id="f3933"> &#34;I never knew until just now when--you put your arms around me. </span>
      <span id="f3934">And I never expected to marry you, Martin, not until just now. </span>
      <span id="f3935"> How did you make me love you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3936">&#34;I don&#39;t know,&#34; he laughed, &#34;unless just by loving you, for I loved you hard enough to melt the heart of a stone, much less the heart of the living, breathing woman you are.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3937">&#34;This is so different from what I thought love would be,&#34; she announced irrelevantly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3938">&#34;What did you think it would be like?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3939">&#34;I didn&#39;t think it would be like this.&#34;  She was looking into his eyes at the moment, but her own dropped as she continued, &#34;You see, I didn&#39;t know what this was like.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3940">He offered to draw her toward him again, but it was no more than a tentative muscular movement of the girdling arm, for he feared that he might be greedy. </span>
      <span id="f3941"> Then he felt her body yielding, and once again she was close in his arms and lips were pressed on lips.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3942">&#34;What will my people say?&#34; she queried, with sudden apprehension, in one of the pauses.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3943">&#34;I don&#39;t know. </span>
      <span id="f3944"> We can find out very easily any time we are so minded.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3945">&#34;But if mamma objects? </span>
      <span id="f3946"> I am sure I am afraid to tell her.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3947">&#34;Let me tell her,&#34; he volunteered valiantly. </span>
      <span id="f3948"> &#34;I think your mother does not like me, but I can win her around. </span>
      <span id="f3949"> A fellow who can win you can win anything. </span>
      <span id="f3950"> And if we don&#39;t--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3951">&#34;Yes?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3952">&#34;Why, we&#39;ll have each other. </span>
      <span id="f3953"> But there&#39;s no danger not winning your mother to our marriage. </span>
      <span id="f3954"> She loves you too well.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3955">&#34;I should not like to break her heart,&#34; Ruth said pensively.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3956">He felt like assuring her that mothers&#39; hearts were not so easily broken, but instead he said, &#34;And love is the greatest thing in the world.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3957">&#34;Do you know, Martin, you sometimes frighten me. </span>
      <span id="f3958"> I am frightened now, when I think of you and of what you have been. </span>
      <span id="f3959"> You must be very, very good to me. </span>
      <span id="f3960"> Remember, after all, that I am only a child. </span>
      <span id="f3961"> I never loved before.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3962">&#34;Nor I. </span>
      <span id="f3963"> We are both children together. </span>
      <span id="f3964"> And we are fortunate above most, for we have found our first love in each other.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3965">&#34;But that is impossible!&#34; she cried, withdrawing herself from his arms with a swift, passionate movement. </span>
      <span id="f3966"> &#34;Impossible for you. </span>
      <span id="f3967"> You have been a sailor, and sailors, I have heard, are--are--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3968">Her voice faltered and died away.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3969">&#34;Are addicted to having a wife in every port?&#34; he suggested. </span>
      <span id="f3970"> &#34;Is that what you mean?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3971">&#34;Yes,&#34; she answered in a low voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3972">&#34;But that is not love.&#34;  He spoke authoritatively. </span>
      <span id="f3973"> &#34;I have been in many ports, but I never knew a passing touch of love until I saw you that first night. </span>
      <span id="f3974"> Do you know, when I said good night and went away, I was almost arrested.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3975">&#34;Arrested?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3976">&#34;Yes. </span>
      <span id="f3977"> The policeman thought I was drunk; and I was, too--with love for you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3978">&#34;But you said we were children, and I said it was impossible, for you, and we have strayed away from the point.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3979">&#34;I said that I never loved anybody but you,&#34; he replied. </span>
      <span id="f3980"> &#34;You are my first, my very first.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3981">&#34;And yet you have been a sailor,&#34; she objected.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3982">&#34;But that doesn&#39;t prevent me from loving you the first.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3983">&#34;And there have been women--other women--oh!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3984">And to Martin Eden&#39;s supreme surprise, she burst into a storm of tears that took more kisses than one and many caresses to drive away. </span>
      <span id="f3985"> And all the while there was running through his head Kipling&#39;s line: &#34;_And the Colonel&#39;s lady and Judy O&#39;Grady are sisters under their skins_.&#34;  It was true, he decided; though the novels he had read had led him to believe otherwise. </span>
      <span id="f3986"> His idea, for which the novels were responsible, had been that only formal proposals obtained in the upper classes. </span>
      <span id="f3987"> It was all right enough, down whence he had come, for youths and maidens to win each other by contact; but for the exalted personages up above on the heights to make love in similar fashion had seemed unthinkable. </span>
      <span id="f3988"> Yet the novels were wrong. </span>
      <span id="f3989"> Here was a proof of it. </span>
      <span id="f3990"> The same pressures and caresses, unaccompanied by speech, that were efficacious with the girls of the working-class, were equally efficacious with the girls above the working- class. </span>
      <span id="f3991"> They were all of the same flesh, after all, sisters under their skins; and he might have known as much himself had he remembered his Spencer. </span>
      <span id="f3992"> As he held Ruth in his arms and soothed her, he took great consolation in the thought that the Colonel&#39;s lady and Judy O&#39;Grady were pretty much alike under their skins. </span>
      <span id="f3993"> It brought Ruth closer to him, made her possible. </span>
      <span id="f3994"> Her dear flesh was as anybody&#39;s flesh, as his flesh. </span>
      <span id="f3995"> There was no bar to their marriage. </span>
      <span id="f3996"> Class difference was the only difference, and class was extrinsic. </span>
      <span id="f3997"> It could be shaken off. </span>
      <span id="f3998"> A slave, he had read, had risen to the Roman purple. </span>
      <span id="f3999"> That being so, then he could rise to Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f4000"> Under her purity, and saintliness, and culture, and ethereal beauty of soul, she was, in things fundamentally human, just like Lizzie Connolly and all Lizzie Connollys. </span>
      <span id="f4001"> All that was possible of them was possible of her. </span>
      <span id="f4002"> She could love, and hate, maybe have hysterics; and she could certainly be jealous, as she was jealous now, uttering her last sobs in his arms.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4003">&#34;Besides, I am older than you,&#34; she remarked suddenly, opening her eyes and looking up at him, &#34;three years older.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4004">&#34;Hush, you are only a child, and I am forty years older than you, in experience,&#34; was his answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4005">In truth, they were children together, so far as love was concerned, and they were as naive and immature in the expression of their love as a pair of children, and this despite the fact that she was crammed with a university education and that his head was full of scientific philosophy and the hard facts of life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4006">They sat on through the passing glory of the day, talking as lovers are prone to talk, marvelling at the wonder of love and at destiny that had flung them so strangely together, and dogmatically believing that they loved to a degree never attained by lovers before. </span>
      <span id="f4007"> And they returned insistently, again and again, to a rehearsal of their first impressions of each other and to hopeless attempts to analyze just precisely what they felt for each other and how much there was of it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4008">The cloud-masses on the western horizon received the descending sun, and the circle of the sky turned to rose, while the zenith glowed with the same warm color. </span>
      <span id="f4009"> The rosy light was all about them, flooding over them, as she sang, &#34;Good-by, Sweet Day.&#34;  She sang softly, leaning in the cradle of his arm, her hands in his, their hearts in each other&#39;s hands.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>