<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f4010">CHAPTER XXII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f4011">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f4012">Morse did not require a mother&#39;s intuition to read the advertisement in Ruth&#39;s face when she returned home. </span>
      <span id="f4013"> The flush that would not leave the cheeks told the simple story, and more eloquently did the eyes, large and bright, reflecting an unmistakable inward glory.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4014">&#34;What has happened?&#34; Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f4015">Morse asked, having bided her time till Ruth had gone to bed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4016">&#34;You know?&#34; Ruth queried, with trembling lips.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4017">For reply, her mother&#39;s arm went around her, and a hand was softly caressing her hair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4018">&#34;He did not speak,&#34; she blurted out. </span>
      <span id="f4019"> &#34;I did not intend that it should happen, and I would never have let him speak--only he didn&#39;t speak.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4020">&#34;But if he did not speak, then nothing could have happened, could it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4021">&#34;But it did, just the same.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4022">&#34;In the name of goodness, child, what are you babbling about?&#34; Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f4023">Morse was bewildered. </span>
      <span id="f4024"> &#34;I don&#39;t think I know what happened, after all. </span>
      <span id="f4025"> What did happen?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4026">Ruth looked at her mother in surprise.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4027">&#34;I thought you knew. </span>
      <span id="f4028"> Why, we&#39;re engaged, Martin and I.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4029">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f4030">Morse laughed with incredulous vexation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4031">&#34;No, he didn&#39;t speak,&#34; Ruth explained. </span>
      <span id="f4032"> &#34;He just loved me, that was all. </span>
      <span id="f4033">I was as surprised as you are. </span>
      <span id="f4034"> He didn&#39;t say a word. </span>
      <span id="f4035"> He just put his arm around me. </span>
      <span id="f4036"> And--and I was not myself. </span>
      <span id="f4037"> And he kissed me, and I kissed him. </span>
      <span id="f4038"> I couldn&#39;t help it. </span>
      <span id="f4039"> I just had to. </span>
      <span id="f4040"> And then I knew I loved him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4041">She paused, waiting with expectancy the benediction of her mother&#39;s kiss, but Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f4042">Morse was coldly silent.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4043">&#34;It is a dreadful accident, I know,&#34; Ruth recommenced with a sinking voice. </span>
      <span id="f4044"> &#34;And I don&#39;t know how you will ever forgive me. </span>
      <span id="f4045"> But I couldn&#39;t help it. </span>
      <span id="f4046"> I did not dream that I loved him until that moment. </span>
      <span id="f4047"> And you must tell father for me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4048">&#34;Would it not be better not to tell your father? </span>
      <span id="f4049"> Let me see Martin Eden, and talk with him, and explain. </span>
      <span id="f4050"> He will understand and release you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4051">&#34;No! </span>
      <span id="f4052">no!&#34; Ruth cried, starting up. </span>
      <span id="f4053"> &#34;I do not want to be released. </span>
      <span id="f4054"> I love him, and love is very sweet. </span>
      <span id="f4055"> I am going to marry him--of course, if you will let me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4056">&#34;We have other plans for you, Ruth, dear, your father and I--oh, no, no; no man picked out for you, or anything like that. </span>
      <span id="f4057"> Our plans go no farther than your marrying some man in your own station in life, a good and honorable gentleman, whom you will select yourself, when you love him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4058">&#34;But I love Martin already,&#34; was the plaintive protest.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4059">&#34;We would not influence your choice in any way; but you are our daughter, and we could not bear to see you make a marriage such as this. </span>
      <span id="f4060"> He has nothing but roughness and coarseness to offer you in exchange for all that is refined and delicate in you. </span>
      <span id="f4061"> He is no match for you in any way. </span>
      <span id="f4062">He could not support you. </span>
      <span id="f4063"> We have no foolish ideas about wealth, but comfort is another matter, and our daughter should at least marry a man who can give her that--and not a penniless adventurer, a sailor, a cowboy, a smuggler, and Heaven knows what else, who, in addition to everything, is hare-brained and irresponsible.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4064">Ruth was silent. </span>
      <span id="f4065"> Every word she recognized as true.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4066">&#34;He wastes his time over his writing, trying to accomplish what geniuses and rare men with college educations sometimes accomplish. </span>
      <span id="f4067"> A man thinking of marriage should be preparing for marriage. </span>
      <span id="f4068"> But not he. </span>
      <span id="f4069"> As I have said, and I know you agree with me, he is irresponsible. </span>
      <span id="f4070"> And why should he not be? </span>
      <span id="f4071"> It is the way of sailors. </span>
      <span id="f4072"> He has never learned to be economical or temperate. </span>
      <span id="f4073"> The spendthrift years have marked him. </span>
      <span id="f4074"> It is not his fault, of course, but that does not alter his nature. </span>
      <span id="f4075"> And have you thought of the years of licentiousness he inevitably has lived? </span>
      <span id="f4076"> Have you thought of that, daughter? </span>
      <span id="f4077"> You know what marriage means.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4078">Ruth shuddered and clung close to her mother.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4079">&#34;I have thought.&#34;  Ruth waited a long time for the thought to frame itself. </span>
      <span id="f4080"> &#34;And it is terrible. </span>
      <span id="f4081"> It sickens me to think of it. </span>
      <span id="f4082"> I told you it was a dreadful accident, my loving him; but I can&#39;t help myself. </span>
      <span id="f4083"> Could you help loving father? </span>
      <span id="f4084"> Then it is the same with me. </span>
      <span id="f4085"> There is something in me, in him--I never knew it was there until to-day--but it is there, and it makes me love him. </span>
      <span id="f4086"> I never thought to love him, but, you see, I do,&#34; she concluded, a certain faint triumph in her voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4087">They talked long, and to little purpose, in conclusion agreeing to wait an indeterminate time without doing anything.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4088">The same conclusion was reached, a little later that night, between Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f4089">Morse and her husband, after she had made due confession of the miscarriage of her plans.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4090">&#34;It could hardly have come otherwise,&#34; was Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4091">Morse&#39;s judgment. </span>
      <span id="f4092"> &#34;This sailor-fellow has been the only man she was in touch with. </span>
      <span id="f4093"> Sooner or later she was going to awaken anyway; and she did awaken, and lo! </span>
      <span id="f4094">here was this sailor-fellow, the only accessible man at the moment, and of course she promptly loved him, or thought she did, which amounts to the same thing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4095">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f4096">Morse took it upon herself to work slowly and indirectly upon Ruth, rather than to combat her. </span>
      <span id="f4097"> There would be plenty of time for this, for Martin was not in position to marry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4098">&#34;Let her see all she wants of him,&#34; was Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4099">Morse&#39;s advice. </span>
      <span id="f4100"> &#34;The more she knows him, the less she&#39;ll love him, I wager. </span>
      <span id="f4101"> And give her plenty of contrast. </span>
      <span id="f4102"> Make a point of having young people at the house. </span>
      <span id="f4103"> Young women and young men, all sorts of young men, clever men, men who have done something or who are doing things, men of her own class, gentlemen. </span>
      <span id="f4104"> She can gauge him by them. </span>
      <span id="f4105"> They will show him up for what he is. </span>
      <span id="f4106"> And after all, he is a mere boy of twenty-one. </span>
      <span id="f4107"> Ruth is no more than a child. </span>
      <span id="f4108"> It is calf love with the pair of them, and they will grow out of it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4109">So the matter rested. </span>
      <span id="f4110"> Within the family it was accepted that Ruth and Martin were engaged, but no announcement was made. </span>
      <span id="f4111"> The family did not think it would ever be necessary. </span>
      <span id="f4112"> Also, it was tacitly understood that it was to be a long engagement. </span>
      <span id="f4113"> They did not ask Martin to go to work, nor to cease writing. </span>
      <span id="f4114"> They did not intend to encourage him to mend himself. </span>
      <span id="f4115"> And he aided and abetted them in their unfriendly designs, for going to work was farthest from his thoughts.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4116">&#34;I wonder if you&#39;ll like what I have done!&#34; he said to Ruth several days later. </span>
      <span id="f4117"> &#34;I&#39;ve decided that boarding with my sister is too expensive, and I am going to board myself. </span>
      <span id="f4118"> I&#39;ve rented a little room out in North Oakland, retired neighborhood and all the rest, you know, and I&#39;ve bought an oil-burner on which to cook.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4119">Ruth was overjoyed. </span>
      <span id="f4120"> The oil-burner especially pleased her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4121">&#34;That was the way Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4122">Butler began his start,&#34; she said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4123">Martin frowned inwardly at the citation of that worthy gentleman, and went on: &#34;I put stamps on all my manuscripts and started them off to the editors again. </span>
      <span id="f4124"> Then to-day I moved in, and to-morrow I start to work.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4125">&#34;A position!&#34; she cried, betraying the gladness of her surprise in all her body, nestling closer to him, pressing his hand, smiling. </span>
      <span id="f4126"> &#34;And you never told me! </span>
      <span id="f4127"> What is it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4128">He shook his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4129">&#34;I meant that I was going to work at my writing.&#34;  Her face fell, and he went on hastily. </span>
      <span id="f4130"> &#34;Don&#39;t misjudge me. </span>
      <span id="f4131"> I am not going in this time with any iridescent ideas. </span>
      <span id="f4132"> It is to be a cold, prosaic, matter-of-fact business proposition. </span>
      <span id="f4133"> It is better than going to sea again, and I shall earn more money than any position in Oakland can bring an unskilled man.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4134">&#34;You see, this vacation I have taken has given me perspective. </span>
      <span id="f4135"> I haven&#39;t been working the life out of my body, and I haven&#39;t been writing, at least not for publication. </span>
      <span id="f4136"> All I&#39;ve done has been to love you and to think. </span>
      <span id="f4137"> I&#39;ve read some, too, but it has been part of my thinking, and I have read principally magazines. </span>
      <span id="f4138"> I have generalized about myself, and the world, my place in it, and my chance to win to a place that will be fit for you. </span>
      <span id="f4139"> Also, I&#39;ve been reading Spencer&#39;s &#39;Philosophy of Style,&#39; and found out a lot of what was the matter with me--or my writing, rather; and for that matter with most of the writing that is published every month in the magazines.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4140">&#34;But the upshot of it all--of my thinking and reading and loving--is that I am going to move to Grub Street. </span>
      <span id="f4141"> I shall leave masterpieces alone and do hack-work--jokes, paragraphs, feature articles, humorous verse, and society verse--all the rot for which there seems so much demand. </span>
      <span id="f4142"> Then there are the newspaper syndicates, and the newspaper short-story syndicates, and the syndicates for the Sunday supplements. </span>
      <span id="f4143"> I can go ahead and hammer out the stuff they want, and earn the equivalent of a good salary by it. </span>
      <span id="f4144"> There are free-lances, you know, who earn as much as four or five hundred a month. </span>
      <span id="f4145"> I don&#39;t care to become as they; but I&#39;ll earn a good living, and have plenty of time to myself, which I wouldn&#39;t have in any position.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4146">&#34;Then, I&#39;ll have my spare time for study and for real work. </span>
      <span id="f4147"> In between the grind I&#39;ll try my hand at masterpieces, and I&#39;ll study and prepare myself for the writing of masterpieces. </span>
      <span id="f4148"> Why, I am amazed at the distance I have come already. </span>
      <span id="f4149"> When I first tried to write, I had nothing to write about except a few paltry experiences which I neither understood nor appreciated. </span>
      <span id="f4150"> But I had no thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f4151"> I really didn&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f4152"> I didn&#39;t even have the words with which to think. </span>
      <span id="f4153"> My experiences were so many meaningless pictures. </span>
      <span id="f4154"> But as I began to add to my knowledge, and to my vocabulary, I saw something more in my experiences than mere pictures. </span>
      <span id="f4155"> I retained the pictures and I found their interpretation. </span>
      <span id="f4156"> That was when I began to do good work, when I wrote &#39;Adventure,&#39;  &#39;Joy,&#39; &#39;The Pot,&#39; &#39;The Wine of Life,&#39; &#39;The Jostling Street,&#39; the &#39;Love-cycle,&#39; and the &#39;Sea Lyrics.&#39;  I shall write more like them, and better; but I shall do it in my spare time. </span>
      <span id="f4157"> My feet are on the solid earth, now. </span>
      <span id="f4158"> Hack-work and income first, masterpieces afterward. </span>
      <span id="f4159"> Just to show you, I wrote half a dozen jokes last night for the comic weeklies; and just as I was going to bed, the thought struck me to try my hand at a triolet--a humorous one; and inside an hour I had written four. </span>
      <span id="f4160"> They ought to be worth a dollar apiece. </span>
      <span id="f4161"> Four dollars right there for a few afterthoughts on the way to bed.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4162">&#34;Of course it&#39;s all valueless, just so much dull and sordid plodding; but it is no more dull and sordid than keeping books at sixty dollars a month, adding up endless columns of meaningless figures until one dies. </span>
      <span id="f4163">And furthermore, the hack-work keeps me in touch with things literary and gives me time to try bigger things.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4164">&#34;But what good are these bigger-things, these masterpieces?&#34; Ruth demanded. </span>
      <span id="f4165"> &#34;You can&#39;t sell them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4166">&#34;Oh, yes, I can,&#34; he began; but she interrupted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4167">&#34;All those you named, and which you say yourself are good--you have not sold any of them. </span>
      <span id="f4168"> We can&#39;t get married on masterpieces that won&#39;t sell.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4169">&#34;Then we&#39;ll get married on triolets that will sell,&#34; he asserted stoutly, putting his arm around her and drawing a very unresponsive sweetheart toward him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4170">&#34;Listen to this,&#34; he went on in attempted gayety. </span>
      <span id="f4171"> &#34;It&#39;s not art, but it&#39;s a dollar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4172">&#34;He came in    When I was out,    To borrow some tin    Was why he came in,    And he went without;    So I was in    And he was out.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4173">The merry lilt with which he had invested the jingle was at variance with the dejection that came into his face as he finished. </span>
      <span id="f4174"> He had drawn no smile from Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f4175"> She was looking at him in an earnest and troubled way.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4176">&#34;It may be a dollar,&#34; she said, &#34;but it is a jester&#39;s dollar, the fee of a clown. </span>
      <span id="f4177"> Don&#39;t you see, Martin, the whole thing is lowering. </span>
      <span id="f4178"> I want the man I love and honor to be something finer and higher than a perpetrator of jokes and doggerel.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4179">&#34;You want him to be like--say Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4180">Butler?&#34; he suggested.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4181">&#34;I know you don&#39;t like Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4182">Butler,&#34; she began.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4183">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4184">Butler&#39;s all right,&#34; he interrupted. </span>
      <span id="f4185"> &#34;It&#39;s only his indigestion I find fault with. </span>
      <span id="f4186"> But to save me I can&#39;t see any difference between writing jokes or comic verse and running a type-writer, taking dictation, or keeping sets of books. </span>
      <span id="f4187"> It is all a means to an end. </span>
      <span id="f4188"> Your theory is for me to begin with keeping books in order to become a successful lawyer or man of business. </span>
      <span id="f4189"> Mine is to begin with hack-work and develop into an able author.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4190">&#34;There is a difference,&#34; she insisted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4191">&#34;What is it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4192">&#34;Why, your good work, what you yourself call good, you can&#39;t sell. </span>
      <span id="f4193"> You have tried, you know that,--but the editors won&#39;t buy it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4194">&#34;Give me time, dear,&#34; he pleaded. </span>
      <span id="f4195"> &#34;The hack-work is only makeshift, and I don&#39;t take it seriously. </span>
      <span id="f4196"> Give me two years. </span>
      <span id="f4197"> I shall succeed in that time, and the editors will be glad to buy my good work. </span>
      <span id="f4198"> I know what I am saying; I have faith in myself. </span>
      <span id="f4199"> I know what I have in me; I know what literature is, now; I know the average rot that is poured out by a lot of little men; and I know that at the end of two years I shall be on the highroad to success. </span>
      <span id="f4200"> As for business, I shall never succeed at it. </span>
      <span id="f4201"> I am not in sympathy with it. </span>
      <span id="f4202"> It strikes me as dull, and stupid, and mercenary, and tricky. </span>
      <span id="f4203"> Anyway I am not adapted for it. </span>
      <span id="f4204"> I&#39;d never get beyond a clerkship, and how could you and I be happy on the paltry earnings of a clerk? </span>
      <span id="f4205"> I want the best of everything in the world for you, and the only time when I won&#39;t want it will be when there is something better. </span>
      <span id="f4206"> And I&#39;m going to get it, going to get all of it. </span>
      <span id="f4207"> The income of a successful author makes Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4208">Butler look cheap. </span>
      <span id="f4209"> A &#39;best-seller&#39; will earn anywhere between fifty and a hundred thousand dollars--sometimes more and sometimes less; but, as a rule, pretty close to those figures.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4210">She remained silent; her disappointment was apparent.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4211">&#34;Well?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4212">&#34;I had hoped and planned otherwise. </span>
      <span id="f4213"> I had thought, and I still think, that the best thing for you would be to study shorthand--you already know type-writing--and go into father&#39;s office. </span>
      <span id="f4214"> You have a good mind, and I am confident you would succeed as a lawyer.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>