<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f4215">CHAPTER XXIII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f4216">That Ruth had little faith in his power as a writer, did not alter her nor diminish her in Martin&#39;s eyes. </span>
      <span id="f4217"> In the breathing spell of the vacation he had taken, he had spent many hours in self-analysis, and thereby learned much of himself. </span>
      <span id="f4218"> He had discovered that he loved beauty more than fame, and that what desire he had for fame was largely for Ruth&#39;s sake. </span>
      <span id="f4219"> It was for this reason that his desire for fame was strong. </span>
      <span id="f4220">He wanted to be great in the world&#39;s eyes; &#34;to make good,&#34; as he expressed it, in order that the woman he loved should be proud of him and deem him worthy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4221">As for himself, he loved beauty passionately, and the joy of serving her was to him sufficient wage. </span>
      <span id="f4222"> And more than beauty he loved Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f4223"> He considered love the finest thing in the world. </span>
      <span id="f4224"> It was love that had worked the revolution in him, changing him from an uncouth sailor to a student and an artist; therefore, to him, the finest and greatest of the three, greater than learning and artistry, was love. </span>
      <span id="f4225"> Already he had discovered that his brain went beyond Ruth&#39;s, just as it went beyond the brains of her brothers, or the brain of her father. </span>
      <span id="f4226"> In spite of every advantage of university training, and in the face of her bachelorship of arts, his power of intellect overshadowed hers, and his year or so of self-study and equipment gave him a mastery of the affairs of the world and art and life that she could never hope to possess.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4227">All this he realized, but it did not affect his love for her, nor her love for him. </span>
      <span id="f4228"> Love was too fine and noble, and he was too loyal a lover for him to besmirch love with criticism. </span>
      <span id="f4229"> What did love have to do with Ruth&#39;s divergent views on art, right conduct, the French Revolution, or equal suffrage? </span>
      <span id="f4230"> They were mental processes, but love was beyond reason; it was superrational. </span>
      <span id="f4231"> He could not belittle love. </span>
      <span id="f4232"> He worshipped it. </span>
      <span id="f4233">Love lay on the mountain-tops beyond the valley-land of reason. </span>
      <span id="f4234"> It was a sublimates condition of existence, the topmost peak of living, and it came rarely. </span>
      <span id="f4235"> Thanks to the school of scientific philosophers he favored, he knew the biological significance of love; but by a refined process of the same scientific reasoning he reached the conclusion that the human organism achieved its highest purpose in love, that love must not be questioned, but must be accepted as the highest guerdon of life. </span>
      <span id="f4236"> Thus, he considered the lover blessed over all creatures, and it was a delight to him to think of &#34;God&#39;s own mad lover,&#34; rising above the things of earth, above wealth and judgment, public opinion and applause, rising above life itself and &#34;dying on a kiss.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4237">Much of this Martin had already reasoned out, and some of it he reasoned out later. </span>
      <span id="f4238"> In the meantime he worked, taking no recreation except when he went to see Ruth, and living like a Spartan. </span>
      <span id="f4239"> He paid two dollars and a half a month rent for the small room he got from his Portuguese landlady, Maria Silva, a virago and a widow, hard working and harsher tempered, rearing her large brood of children somehow, and drowning her sorrow and fatigue at irregular intervals in a gallon of the thin, sour wine that she bought from the corner grocery and saloon for fifteen cents. </span>
      <span id="f4240"> From detesting her and her foul tongue at first, Martin grew to admire her as he observed the brave fight she made. </span>
      <span id="f4241"> There were but four rooms in the little house--three, when Martin&#39;s was subtracted. </span>
      <span id="f4242"> One of these, the parlor, gay with an ingrain carpet and dolorous with a funeral card and a death-picture of one of her numerous departed babes, was kept strictly for company. </span>
      <span id="f4243"> The blinds were always down, and her barefooted tribe was never permitted to enter the sacred precinct save on state occasions. </span>
      <span id="f4244"> She cooked, and all ate, in the kitchen, where she likewise washed, starched, and ironed clothes on all days of the week except Sunday; for her income came largely from taking in washing from her more prosperous neighbors. </span>
      <span id="f4245"> Remained the bedroom, small as the one occupied by Martin, into which she and her seven little ones crowded and slept. </span>
      <span id="f4246"> It was an everlasting miracle to Martin how it was accomplished, and from her side of the thin partition he heard nightly every detail of the going to bed, the squalls and squabbles, the soft chattering, and the sleepy, twittering noises as of birds. </span>
      <span id="f4247"> Another source of income to Maria were her cows, two of them, which she milked night and morning and which gained a surreptitious livelihood from vacant lots and the grass that grew on either side the public side walks, attended always by one or more of her ragged boys, whose watchful guardianship consisted chiefly in keeping their eyes out for the poundmen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4248">In his own small room Martin lived, slept, studied, wrote, and kept house. </span>
      <span id="f4249"> Before the one window, looking out on the tiny front porch, was the kitchen table that served as desk, library, and type-writing stand. </span>
      <span id="f4250">The bed, against the rear wall, occupied two-thirds of the total space of the room. </span>
      <span id="f4251"> The table was flanked on one side by a gaudy bureau, manufactured for profit and not for service, the thin veneer of which was shed day by day. </span>
      <span id="f4252"> This bureau stood in the corner, and in the opposite corner, on the table&#39;s other flank, was the kitchen--the oil-stove on a dry-goods box, inside of which were dishes and cooking utensils, a shelf on the wall for provisions, and a bucket of water on the floor. </span>
      <span id="f4253"> Martin had to carry his water from the kitchen sink, there being no tap in his room. </span>
      <span id="f4254"> On days when there was much steam to his cooking, the harvest of veneer from the bureau was unusually generous. </span>
      <span id="f4255"> Over the bed, hoisted by a tackle to the ceiling, was his bicycle. </span>
      <span id="f4256"> At first he had tried to keep it in the basement; but the tribe of Silva, loosening the bearings and puncturing the tires, had driven him out. </span>
      <span id="f4257"> Next he attempted the tiny front porch, until a howling southeaster drenched the wheel a night-long. </span>
      <span id="f4258">Then he had retreated with it to his room and slung it aloft.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4259">A small closet contained his clothes and the books he had accumulated and for which there was no room on the table or under the table. </span>
      <span id="f4260"> Hand in hand with reading, he had developed the habit of making notes, and so copiously did he make them that there would have been no existence for him in the confined quarters had he not rigged several clothes-lines across the room on which the notes were hung. </span>
      <span id="f4261"> Even so, he was crowded until navigating the room was a difficult task. </span>
      <span id="f4262"> He could not open the door without first closing the closet door, and vice versa. </span>
      <span id="f4263"> It was impossible for him anywhere to traverse the room in a straight line. </span>
      <span id="f4264"> To go from the door to the head of the bed was a zigzag course that he was never quite able to accomplish in the dark without collisions. </span>
      <span id="f4265"> Having settled the difficulty of the conflicting doors, he had to steer sharply to the right to avoid the kitchen. </span>
      <span id="f4266"> Next, he sheered to the left, to escape the foot of the bed; but this sheer, if too generous, brought him against the corner of the table. </span>
      <span id="f4267"> With a sudden twitch and lurch, he terminated the sheer and bore off to the right along a sort of canal, one bank of which was the bed, the other the table. </span>
      <span id="f4268"> When the one chair in the room was at its usual place before the table, the canal was unnavigable. </span>
      <span id="f4269"> When the chair was not in use, it reposed on top of the bed, though sometimes he sat on the chair when cooking, reading a book while the water boiled, and even becoming skilful enough to manage a paragraph or two while steak was frying. </span>
      <span id="f4270"> Also, so small was the little corner that constituted the kitchen, he was able, sitting down, to reach anything he needed. </span>
      <span id="f4271"> In fact, it was expedient to cook sitting down; standing up, he was too often in his own way.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4272">In conjunction with a perfect stomach that could digest anything, he possessed knowledge of the various foods that were at the same time nutritious and cheap. </span>
      <span id="f4273"> Pea-soup was a common article in his diet, as well as potatoes and beans, the latter large and brown and cooked in Mexican style. </span>
      <span id="f4274"> Rice, cooked as American housewives never cook it and can never learn to cook it, appeared on Martin&#39;s table at least once a day. </span>
      <span id="f4275"> Dried fruits were less expensive than fresh, and he had usually a pot of them, cooked and ready at hand, for they took the place of butter on his bread. </span>
      <span id="f4276">Occasionally he graced his table with a piece of round-steak, or with a soup-bone. </span>
      <span id="f4277"> Coffee, without cream or milk, he had twice a day, in the evening substituting tea; but both coffee and tea were excellently cooked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4278">There was need for him to be economical. </span>
      <span id="f4279"> His vacation had consumed nearly all he had earned in the laundry, and he was so far from his market that weeks must elapse before he could hope for the first returns from his hack-work. </span>
      <span id="f4280"> Except at such times as he saw Ruth, or dropped in to see his sister Gertude, he lived a recluse, in each day accomplishing at least three days&#39; labor of ordinary men. </span>
      <span id="f4281"> He slept a scant five hours, and only one with a constitution of iron could have held himself down, as Martin did, day after day, to nineteen consecutive hours of toil. </span>
      <span id="f4282"> He never lost a moment. </span>
      <span id="f4283"> On the looking-glass were lists of definitions and pronunciations; when shaving, or dressing, or combing his hair, he conned these lists over. </span>
      <span id="f4284"> Similar lists were on the wall over the oil-stove, and they were similarly conned while he was engaged in cooking or in washing the dishes. </span>
      <span id="f4285"> New lists continually displaced the old ones. </span>
      <span id="f4286"> Every strange or partly familiar word encountered in his reading was immediately jotted down, and later, when a sufficient number had been accumulated, were typed and pinned to the wall or looking-glass. </span>
      <span id="f4287"> He even carried them in his pockets, and reviewed them at odd moments on the street, or while waiting in butcher shop or grocery to be served.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4288">He went farther in the matter. </span>
      <span id="f4289"> Reading the works of men who had arrived, he noted every result achieved by them, and worked out the tricks by which they had been achieved--the tricks of narrative, of exposition, of style, the points of view, the contrasts, the epigrams; and of all these he made lists for study. </span>
      <span id="f4290"> He did not ape. </span>
      <span id="f4291"> He sought principles. </span>
      <span id="f4292"> He drew up lists of effective and fetching mannerisms, till out of many such, culled from many writers, he was able to induce the general principle of mannerism, and, thus equipped, to cast about for new and original ones of his own, and to weigh and measure and appraise them properly. </span>
      <span id="f4293"> In similar manner he collected lists of strong phrases, the phrases of living language, phrases that bit like acid and scorched like flame, or that glowed and were mellow and luscious in the midst of the arid desert of common speech. </span>
      <span id="f4294"> He sought always for the principle that lay behind and beneath. </span>
      <span id="f4295"> He wanted to know how the thing was done; after that he could do it for himself. </span>
      <span id="f4296"> He was not content with the fair face of beauty. </span>
      <span id="f4297"> He dissected beauty in his crowded little bedroom laboratory, where cooking smells alternated with the outer bedlam of the Silva tribe; and, having dissected and learned the anatomy of beauty, he was nearer being able to create beauty itself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4298">He was so made that he could work only with understanding. </span>
      <span id="f4299"> He could not work blindly, in the dark, ignorant of what he was producing and trusting to chance and the star of his genius that the effect produced should be right and fine. </span>
      <span id="f4300"> He had no patience with chance effects. </span>
      <span id="f4301"> He wanted to know why and how. </span>
      <span id="f4302"> His was deliberate creative genius, and, before he began a story or poem, the thing itself was already alive in his brain, with the end in sight and the means of realizing that end in his conscious possession. </span>
      <span id="f4303"> Otherwise the effort was doomed to failure. </span>
      <span id="f4304"> On the other hand, he appreciated the chance effects in words and phrases that came lightly and easily into his brain, and that later stood all tests of beauty and power and developed tremendous and incommunicable connotations. </span>
      <span id="f4305"> Before such he bowed down and marvelled, knowing that they were beyond the deliberate creation of any man. </span>
      <span id="f4306"> And no matter how much he dissected beauty in search of the principles that underlie beauty and make beauty possible, he was aware, always, of the innermost mystery of beauty to which he did not penetrate and to which no man had ever penetrated. </span>
      <span id="f4307"> He knew full well, from his Spencer, that man can never attain ultimate knowledge of anything, and that the mystery of beauty was no less than that of life--nay, more that the fibres of beauty and life were intertwisted, and that he himself was but a bit of the same nonunderstandable fabric, twisted of sunshine and star-dust and wonder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4308">In fact, it was when filled with these thoughts that he wrote his essay entitled &#34;Star-dust,&#34; in which he had his fling, not at the principles of criticism, but at the principal critics. </span>
      <span id="f4309"> It was brilliant, deep, philosophical, and deliciously touched with laughter. </span>
      <span id="f4310"> Also it was promptly rejected by the magazines as often as it was submitted. </span>
      <span id="f4311"> But having cleared his mind of it, he went serenely on his way. </span>
      <span id="f4312"> It was a habit he developed, of incubating and maturing his thought upon a subject, and of then rushing into the type-writer with it. </span>
      <span id="f4313"> That it did not see print was a matter of small moment with him. </span>
      <span id="f4314"> The writing of it was the culminating act of a long mental process, the drawing together of scattered threads of thought and the final generalizing upon all the data with which his mind was burdened. </span>
      <span id="f4315"> To write such an article was the conscious effort by which he freed his mind and made it ready for fresh material and problems. </span>
      <span id="f4316"> It was in a way akin to that common habit of men and women troubled by real or fancied grievances, who periodically and volubly break their long-suffering silence and &#34;have their say&#34; till the last word is said.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>