<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f4317">CHAPTER XXIV</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f4318">The weeks passed. </span>
      <span id="f4319"> Martin ran out of money, and publishers&#39; checks were far away as ever. </span>
      <span id="f4320"> All his important manuscripts had come back and been started out again, and his hack-work fared no better. </span>
      <span id="f4321"> His little kitchen was no longer graced with a variety of foods. </span>
      <span id="f4322"> Caught in the pinch with a part sack of rice and a few pounds of dried apricots, rice and apricots was his menu three times a day for five days hand-running. </span>
      <span id="f4323"> Then he startled to realize on his credit. </span>
      <span id="f4324"> The Portuguese grocer, to whom he had hitherto paid cash, called a halt when Martin&#39;s bill reached the magnificent total of three dollars and eighty-five cents.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4325">&#34;For you see,&#34; said the grocer, &#34;you no catcha da work, I losa da mon&#39;.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4326">And Martin could reply nothing. </span>
      <span id="f4327"> There was no way of explaining. </span>
      <span id="f4328"> It was not true business principle to allow credit to a strong-bodied young fellow of the working-class who was too lazy to work.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4329">&#34;You catcha da job, I let you have mora da grub,&#34; the grocer assured Martin. </span>
      <span id="f4330"> &#34;No job, no grub. </span>
      <span id="f4331"> Thata da business.&#34;  And then, to show that it was purely business foresight and not prejudice, &#34;Hava da drink on da house--good friends justa da same.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4332">So Martin drank, in his easy way, to show that he was good friends with the house, and then went supperless to bed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4333">The fruit store, where Martin had bought his vegetables, was run by an American whose business principles were so weak that he let Martin run a bill of five dollars before stopping his credit. </span>
      <span id="f4334"> The baker stopped at two dollars, and the butcher at four dollars. </span>
      <span id="f4335"> Martin added his debts and found that he was possessed of a total credit in all the world of fourteen dollars and eighty-five cents. </span>
      <span id="f4336"> He was up with his type-writer rent, but he estimated that he could get two months&#39; credit on that, which would be eight dollars. </span>
      <span id="f4337"> When that occurred, he would have exhausted all possible credit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4338">The last purchase from the fruit store had been a sack of potatoes, and for a week he had potatoes, and nothing but potatoes, three times a day. </span>
      <span id="f4339">An occasional dinner at Ruth&#39;s helped to keep strength in his body, though he found it tantalizing enough to refuse further helping when his appetite was raging at sight of so much food spread before it. </span>
      <span id="f4340"> Now and again, though afflicted with secret shame, he dropped in at his sister&#39;s at meal-time and ate as much as he dared--more than he dared at the Morse table.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4341">Day by day he worked on, and day by day the postman delivered to him rejected manuscripts. </span>
      <span id="f4342"> He had no money for stamps, so the manuscripts accumulated in a heap under the table. </span>
      <span id="f4343"> Came a day when for forty hours he had not tasted food. </span>
      <span id="f4344"> He could not hope for a meal at Ruth&#39;s, for she was away to San Rafael on a two weeks&#39; visit; and for very shame&#39;s sake he could not go to his sister&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f4345"> To cap misfortune, the postman, in his afternoon round, brought him five returned manuscripts. </span>
      <span id="f4346"> Then it was that Martin wore his overcoat down into Oakland, and came back without it, but with five dollars tinkling in his pocket. </span>
      <span id="f4347"> He paid a dollar each on account to the four tradesmen, and in his kitchen fried steak and onions, made coffee, and stewed a large pot of prunes. </span>
      <span id="f4348"> And having dined, he sat down at his table-desk and completed before midnight an essay which he entitled &#34;The Dignity of Usury.&#34;  Having typed it out, he flung it under the table, for there had been nothing left from the five dollars with which to buy stamps.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4349">Later on he pawned his watch, and still later his wheel, reducing the amount available for food by putting stamps on all his manuscripts and sending them out. </span>
      <span id="f4350"> He was disappointed with his hack-work. </span>
      <span id="f4351"> Nobody cared to buy. </span>
      <span id="f4352"> He compared it with what he found in the newspapers, weeklies, and cheap magazines, and decided that his was better, far better, than the average; yet it would not sell. </span>
      <span id="f4353"> Then he discovered that most of the newspapers printed a great deal of what was called &#34;plate&#34; stuff, and he got the address of the association that furnished it. </span>
      <span id="f4354"> His own work that he sent in was returned, along with a stereotyped slip informing him that the staff supplied all the copy that was needed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4355">In one of the great juvenile periodicals he noted whole columns of incident and anecdote. </span>
      <span id="f4356"> Here was a chance. </span>
      <span id="f4357"> His paragraphs were returned, and though he tried repeatedly he never succeeded in placing one. </span>
      <span id="f4358"> Later on, when it no longer mattered, he learned that the associate editors and sub-editors augmented their salaries by supplying those paragraphs themselves. </span>
      <span id="f4359"> The comic weeklies returned his jokes and humorous verse, and the light society verse he wrote for the large magazines found no abiding-place. </span>
      <span id="f4360"> Then there was the newspaper storiette. </span>
      <span id="f4361"> He knew that he could write better ones than were published. </span>
      <span id="f4362"> Managing to obtain the addresses of two newspaper syndicates, he deluged them with storiettes. </span>
      <span id="f4363">When he had written twenty and failed to place one of them, he ceased. </span>
      <span id="f4364">And yet, from day to day, he read storiettes in the dailies and weeklies, scores and scores of storiettes, not one of which would compare with his. </span>
      <span id="f4365">In his despondency, he concluded that he had no judgment whatever, that he was hypnotized by what he wrote, and that he was a self-deluded pretender.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4366">The inhuman editorial machine ran smoothly as ever. </span>
      <span id="f4367"> He folded the stamps in with his manuscript, dropped it into the letter-box, and from three weeks to a month afterward the postman came up the steps and handed him the manuscript. </span>
      <span id="f4368"> Surely there were no live, warm editors at the other end. </span>
      <span id="f4369"> It was all wheels and cogs and oil-cups--a clever mechanism operated by automatons. </span>
      <span id="f4370"> He reached stages of despair wherein he doubted if editors existed at all. </span>
      <span id="f4371"> He had never received a sign of the existence of one, and from absence of judgment in rejecting all he wrote it seemed plausible that editors were myths, manufactured and maintained by office boys, typesetters, and pressmen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4372">The hours he spent with Ruth were the only happy ones he had, and they were not all happy. </span>
      <span id="f4373"> He was afflicted always with a gnawing restlessness, more tantalizing than in the old days before he possessed her love; for now that he did possess her love, the possession of her was far away as ever. </span>
      <span id="f4374"> He had asked for two years; time was flying, and he was achieving nothing. </span>
      <span id="f4375"> Again, he was always conscious of the fact that she did not approve what he was doing. </span>
      <span id="f4376"> She did not say so directly. </span>
      <span id="f4377"> Yet indirectly she let him understand it as clearly and definitely as she could have spoken it. </span>
      <span id="f4378"> It was not resentment with her, but disapproval; though less sweet-natured women might have resented where she was no more than disappointed. </span>
      <span id="f4379"> Her disappointment lay in that this man she had taken to mould, refused to be moulded. </span>
      <span id="f4380"> To a certain extent she had found his clay plastic, then it had developed stubbornness, declining to be shaped in the image of her father or of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4381">Butler.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4382">What was great and strong in him, she missed, or, worse yet, misunderstood. </span>
      <span id="f4383"> This man, whose clay was so plastic that he could live in any number of pigeonholes of human existence, she thought wilful and most obstinate because she could not shape him to live in her pigeonhole, which was the only one she knew. </span>
      <span id="f4384"> She could not follow the flights of his mind, and when his brain got beyond her, she deemed him erratic. </span>
      <span id="f4385"> Nobody else&#39;s brain ever got beyond her. </span>
      <span id="f4386"> She could always follow her father and mother, her brothers and Olney; wherefore, when she could not follow Martin, she believed the fault lay with him. </span>
      <span id="f4387"> It was the old tragedy of insularity trying to serve as mentor to the universal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4388">&#34;You worship at the shrine of the established,&#34; he told her once, in a discussion they had over Praps and Vanderwater. </span>
      <span id="f4389"> &#34;I grant that as authorities to quote they are most excellent--the two foremost literary critics in the United States. </span>
      <span id="f4390"> Every school teacher in the land looks up to Vanderwater as the Dean of American criticism. </span>
      <span id="f4391"> Yet I read his stuff, and it seems to me the perfection of the felicitous expression of the inane. </span>
      <span id="f4392"> Why, he is no more than a ponderous bromide, thanks to Gelett Burgess. </span>
      <span id="f4393"> And Praps is no better. </span>
      <span id="f4394"> His &#39;Hemlock Mosses,&#39; for instance is beautifully written. </span>
      <span id="f4395"> Not a comma is out of place; and the tone--ah!--is lofty, so lofty. </span>
      <span id="f4396"> He is the best-paid critic in the United States. </span>
      <span id="f4397">Though, Heaven forbid! </span>
      <span id="f4398">he&#39;s not a critic at all. </span>
      <span id="f4399"> They do criticism better in England.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4400">&#34;But the point is, they sound the popular note, and they sound it so beautifully and morally and contentedly. </span>
      <span id="f4401"> Their reviews remind me of a British Sunday. </span>
      <span id="f4402"> They are the popular mouthpieces. </span>
      <span id="f4403"> They back up your professors of English, and your professors of English back them up. </span>
      <span id="f4404"> And there isn&#39;t an original idea in any of their skulls. </span>
      <span id="f4405"> They know only the established,--in fact, they are the established. </span>
      <span id="f4406"> They are weak minded, and the established impresses itself upon them as easily as the name of the brewery is impressed on a beer bottle. </span>
      <span id="f4407"> And their function is to catch all the young fellows attending the university, to drive out of their minds any glimmering originality that may chance to be there, and to put upon them the stamp of the established.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4408">&#34;I think I am nearer the truth,&#34; she replied, &#34;when I stand by the established, than you are, raging around like an iconoclastic South Sea Islander.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4409">&#34;It was the missionary who did the image breaking,&#34; he laughed. </span>
      <span id="f4410"> &#34;And unfortunately, all the missionaries are off among the heathen, so there are none left at home to break those old images, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4411">Vanderwater and Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4412">Praps.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4413">&#34;And the college professors, as well,&#34; she added.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4414">He shook his head emphatically. </span>
      <span id="f4415"> &#34;No; the science professors should live. </span>
      <span id="f4416">They&#39;re really great. </span>
      <span id="f4417"> But it would be a good deed to break the heads of nine-tenths of the English professors--little, microscopic-minded parrots!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4418">Which was rather severe on the professors, but which to Ruth was blasphemy. </span>
      <span id="f4419"> She could not help but measure the professors, neat, scholarly, in fitting clothes, speaking in well-modulated voices, breathing of culture and refinement, with this almost indescribable young fellow whom somehow she loved, whose clothes never would fit him, whose heavy muscles told of damning toil, who grew excited when he talked, substituting abuse for calm statement and passionate utterance for cool self-possession. </span>
      <span id="f4420"> They at least earned good salaries and were--yes, she compelled herself to face it--were gentlemen; while he could not earn a penny, and he was not as they.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4421">She did not weigh Martin&#39;s words nor judge his argument by them. </span>
      <span id="f4422"> Her conclusion that his argument was wrong was reached--unconsciously, it is true--by a comparison of externals. </span>
      <span id="f4423"> They, the professors, were right in their literary judgments because they were successes. </span>
      <span id="f4424"> Martin&#39;s literary judgments were wrong because he could not sell his wares. </span>
      <span id="f4425"> To use his own phrase, they made good, and he did not make good. </span>
      <span id="f4426"> And besides, it did not seem reasonable that he should be right--he who had stood, so short a time before, in that same living room, blushing and awkward, acknowledging his introduction, looking fearfully about him at the bric-a- brac his swinging shoulders threatened to break, asking how long since Swinburne died, and boastfully announcing that he had read &#34;Excelsior&#34; and the &#34;Psalm of Life.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4427">Unwittingly, Ruth herself proved his point that she worshipped the established. </span>
      <span id="f4428"> Martin followed the processes of her thoughts, but forbore to go farther. </span>
      <span id="f4429"> He did not love her for what she thought of Praps and Vanderwater and English professors, and he was coming to realize, with increasing conviction, that he possessed brain-areas and stretches of knowledge which she could never comprehend nor know existed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4430">In music she thought him unreasonable, and in the matter of opera not only unreasonable but wilfully perverse.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4431">&#34;How did you like it?&#34; she asked him one night, on the way home from the opera.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4432">It was a night when he had taken her at the expense of a month&#39;s rigid economizing on food. </span>
      <span id="f4433"> After vainly waiting for him to speak about it, herself still tremulous and stirred by what she had just seen and heard, she had asked the question.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4434">&#34;I liked the overture,&#34; was his answer. </span>
      <span id="f4435"> &#34;It was splendid.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4436">&#34;Yes, but the opera itself?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4437">&#34;That was splendid too; that is, the orchestra was, though I&#39;d have enjoyed it more if those jumping-jacks had kept quiet or gone off the stage.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4438">Ruth was aghast.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4439">&#34;You don&#39;t mean Tetralani or Barillo?&#34; she queried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4440">&#34;All of them--the whole kit and crew.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4441">&#34;But they are great artists,&#34; she protested.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4442">&#34;They spoiled the music just the same, with their antics and unrealities.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4443">&#34;But don&#39;t you like Barillo&#39;s voice?&#34; Ruth asked. </span>
      <span id="f4444"> &#34;He is next to Caruso, they say.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4445">&#34;Of course I liked him, and I liked Tetralani even better. </span>
      <span id="f4446"> Her voice is exquisite--or at least I think so.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4447">&#34;But, but--&#34; Ruth stammered. </span>
      <span id="f4448"> &#34;I don&#39;t know what you mean, then. </span>
      <span id="f4449"> You admire their voices, yet say they spoiled the music.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4450">&#34;Precisely that. </span>
      <span id="f4451"> I&#39;d give anything to hear them in concert, and I&#39;d give even a bit more not to hear them when the orchestra is playing. </span>
      <span id="f4452"> I&#39;m afraid I am a hopeless realist. </span>
      <span id="f4453"> Great singers are not great actors. </span>
      <span id="f4454"> To hear Barillo sing a love passage with the voice of an angel, and to hear Tetralani reply like another angel, and to hear it all accompanied by a perfect orgy of glowing and colorful music--is ravishing, most ravishing. </span>
      <span id="f4455">I do not admit it. </span>
      <span id="f4456"> I assert it. </span>
      <span id="f4457"> But the whole effect is spoiled when I look at them--at Tetralani, five feet ten in her stocking feet and weighing a hundred and ninety pounds, and at Barillo, a scant five feet four, greasy-featured, with the chest of a squat, undersized blacksmith, and at the pair of them, attitudinizing, clasping their breasts, flinging their arms in the air like demented creatures in an asylum; and when I am expected to accept all this as the faithful illusion of a love-scene between a slender and beautiful princess and a handsome, romantic, young prince--why, I can&#39;t accept it, that&#39;s all. </span>
      <span id="f4458"> It&#39;s rot; it&#39;s absurd; it&#39;s unreal. </span>
      <span id="f4459"> That&#39;s what&#39;s the matter with it. </span>
      <span id="f4460"> It&#39;s not real. </span>
      <span id="f4461"> Don&#39;t tell me that anybody in this world ever made love that way. </span>
      <span id="f4462"> Why, if I&#39;d made love to you in such fashion, you&#39;d have boxed my ears.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4463">&#34;But you misunderstand,&#34; Ruth protested. </span>
      <span id="f4464"> &#34;Every form of art has its limitations.&#34;  (She was busy recalling a lecture she had heard at the university on the conventions of the arts.)  &#34;In painting there are only two dimensions to the canvas, yet you accept the illusion of three dimensions which the art of a painter enables him to throw into the canvas. </span>
      <span id="f4465"> In writing, again, the author must be omnipotent. </span>
      <span id="f4466"> You accept as perfectly legitimate the author&#39;s account of the secret thoughts of the heroine, and yet all the time you know that the heroine was alone when thinking these thoughts, and that neither the author nor any one else was capable of hearing them. </span>
      <span id="f4467"> And so with the stage, with sculpture, with opera, with every art form. </span>
      <span id="f4468"> Certain irreconcilable things must be accepted.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4469">&#34;Yes, I understood that,&#34; Martin answered. </span>
      <span id="f4470"> &#34;All the arts have their conventions.&#34;  (Ruth was surprised at his use of the word. </span>
      <span id="f4471"> It was as if he had studied at the university himself, instead of being ill-equipped from browsing at haphazard through the books in the library.)  &#34;But even the conventions must be real. </span>
      <span id="f4472"> Trees, painted on flat cardboard and stuck up on each side of the stage, we accept as a forest. </span>
      <span id="f4473"> It is a real enough convention. </span>
      <span id="f4474"> But, on the other hand, we would not accept a sea scene as a forest. </span>
      <span id="f4475"> We can&#39;t do it. </span>
      <span id="f4476"> It violates our senses. </span>
      <span id="f4477"> Nor would you, or, rather, should you, accept the ravings and writhings and agonized contortions of those two lunatics to-night as a convincing portrayal of love.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4478">&#34;But you don&#39;t hold yourself superior to all the judges of music?&#34; she protested.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4479">&#34;No, no, not for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f4480"> I merely maintain my right as an individual. </span>
      <span id="f4481">I have just been telling you what I think, in order to explain why the elephantine gambols of Madame Tetralani spoil the orchestra for me. </span>
      <span id="f4482"> The world&#39;s judges of music may all be right. </span>
      <span id="f4483"> But I am I, and I won&#39;t subordinate my taste to the unanimous judgment of mankind. </span>
      <span id="f4484"> If I don&#39;t like a thing, I don&#39;t like it, that&#39;s all; and there is no reason under the sun why I should ape a liking for it just because the majority of my fellow-creatures like it, or make believe they like it. </span>
      <span id="f4485"> I can&#39;t follow the fashions in the things I like or dislike.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4486">&#34;But music, you know, is a matter of training,&#34; Ruth argued; &#34;and opera is even more a matter of training. </span>
      <span id="f4487"> May it not be--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4488">&#34;That I am not trained in opera?&#34; he dashed in.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4489">She nodded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4490">&#34;The very thing,&#34; he agreed. </span>
      <span id="f4491"> &#34;And I consider I am fortunate in not having been caught when I was young. </span>
      <span id="f4492"> If I had, I could have wept sentimental tears to-night, and the clownish antics of that precious pair would have but enhanced the beauty of their voices and the beauty of the accompanying orchestra. </span>
      <span id="f4493"> You are right. </span>
      <span id="f4494"> It&#39;s mostly a matter of training. </span>
      <span id="f4495"> And I am too old, now. </span>
      <span id="f4496"> I must have the real or nothing. </span>
      <span id="f4497"> An illusion that won&#39;t convince is a palpable lie, and that&#39;s what grand opera is to me when little Barillo throws a fit, clutches mighty Tetralani in his arms (also in a fit), and tells her how passionately he adores her.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4498">Again Ruth measured his thoughts by comparison of externals and in accordance with her belief in the established. </span>
      <span id="f4499"> Who was he that he should be right and all the cultured world wrong? </span>
      <span id="f4500"> His words and thoughts made no impression upon her. </span>
      <span id="f4501"> She was too firmly intrenched in the established to have any sympathy with revolutionary ideas. </span>
      <span id="f4502"> She had always been used to music, and she had enjoyed opera ever since she was a child, and all her world had enjoyed it, too. </span>
      <span id="f4503"> Then by what right did Martin Eden emerge, as he had so recently emerged, from his rag-time and working-class songs, and pass judgment on the world&#39;s music? </span>
      <span id="f4504"> She was vexed with him, and as she walked beside him she had a vague feeling of outrage. </span>
      <span id="f4505"> At the best, in her most charitable frame of mind, she considered the statement of his views to be a caprice, an erratic and uncalled-for prank. </span>
      <span id="f4506"> But when he took her in his arms at the door and kissed her good night in tender lover-fashion, she forgot everything in the outrush of her own love to him. </span>
      <span id="f4507"> And later, on a sleepless pillow, she puzzled, as she had often puzzled of late, as to how it was that she loved so strange a man, and loved him despite the disapproval of her people.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4508">And next day Martin Eden cast hack-work aside, and at white heat hammered out an essay to which he gave the title, &#34;The Philosophy of Illusion.&#34;  A stamp started it on its travels, but it was destined to receive many stamps and to be started on many travels in the months that followed.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>