<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XXV</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f4509">CHAPTER XXV</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f4510">Maria Silva was poor, and all the ways of poverty were clear to her. </span>
      <span id="f4511">Poverty, to Ruth, was a word signifying a not-nice condition of existence. </span>
      <span id="f4512"> That was her total knowledge on the subject. </span>
      <span id="f4513"> She knew Martin was poor, and his condition she associated in her mind with the boyhood of Abraham Lincoln, of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4514">Butler, and of other men who had become successes. </span>
      <span id="f4515"> Also, while aware that poverty was anything but delectable, she had a comfortable middle-class feeling that poverty was salutary, that it was a sharp spur that urged on to success all men who were not degraded and hopeless drudges. </span>
      <span id="f4516"> So that her knowledge that Martin was so poor that he had pawned his watch and overcoat did not disturb her. </span>
      <span id="f4517"> She even considered it the hopeful side of the situation, believing that sooner or later it would arouse him and compel him to abandon his writing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4518">Ruth never read hunger in Martin&#39;s face, which had grown lean and had enlarged the slight hollows in the cheeks. </span>
      <span id="f4519"> In fact, she marked the change in his face with satisfaction. </span>
      <span id="f4520"> It seemed to refine him, to remove from him much of the dross of flesh and the too animal-like vigor that lured her while she detested it. </span>
      <span id="f4521"> Sometimes, when with her, she noted an unusual brightness in his eyes, and she admired it, for it made him appear more the poet and the scholar--the things he would have liked to be and which she would have liked him to be. </span>
      <span id="f4522"> But Maria Silva read a different tale in the hollow cheeks and the burning eyes, and she noted the changes in them from day to day, by them following the ebb and flow of his fortunes. </span>
      <span id="f4523"> She saw him leave the house with his overcoat and return without it, though the day was chill and raw, and promptly she saw his cheeks fill out slightly and the fire of hunger leave his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f4524"> In the same way she had seen his wheel and watch go, and after each event she had seen his vigor bloom again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4525">Likewise she watched his toils, and knew the measure of the midnight oil he burned. </span>
      <span id="f4526"> Work! </span>
      <span id="f4527"> She knew that he outdid her, though his work was of a different order. </span>
      <span id="f4528"> And she was surprised to behold that the less food he had, the harder he worked. </span>
      <span id="f4529"> On occasion, in a casual sort of way, when she thought hunger pinched hardest, she would send him in a loaf of new baking, awkwardly covering the act with banter to the effect that it was better than he could bake. </span>
      <span id="f4530"> And again, she would send one of her toddlers in to him with a great pitcher of hot soup, debating inwardly the while whether she was justified in taking it from the mouths of her own flesh and blood. </span>
      <span id="f4531"> Nor was Martin ungrateful, knowing as he did the lives of the poor, and that if ever in the world there was charity, this was it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4532">On a day when she had filled her brood with what was left in the house, Maria invested her last fifteen cents in a gallon of cheap wine. </span>
      <span id="f4533"> Martin, coming into her kitchen to fetch water, was invited to sit down and drink. </span>
      <span id="f4534"> He drank her very-good health, and in return she drank his. </span>
      <span id="f4535"> Then she drank to prosperity in his undertakings, and he drank to the hope that James Grant would show up and pay her for his washing. </span>
      <span id="f4536"> James Grant was a journeymen carpenter who did not always pay his bills and who owed Maria three dollars.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4537">Both Maria and Martin drank the sour new wine on empty stomachs, and it went swiftly to their heads. </span>
      <span id="f4538"> Utterly differentiated creatures that they were, they were lonely in their misery, and though the misery was tacitly ignored, it was the bond that drew them together. </span>
      <span id="f4539"> Maria was amazed to learn that he had been in the Azores, where she had lived until she was eleven. </span>
      <span id="f4540"> She was doubly amazed that he had been in the Hawaiian Islands, whither she had migrated from the Azores with her people. </span>
      <span id="f4541"> But her amazement passed all bounds when he told her he had been on Maui, the particular island whereon she had attained womanhood and married. </span>
      <span id="f4542">Kahului, where she had first met her husband,--he, Martin, had been there twice! </span>
      <span id="f4543"> Yes, she remembered the sugar steamers, and he had been on them--well, well, it was a small world. </span>
      <span id="f4544"> And Wailuku! </span>
      <span id="f4545"> That place, too! </span>
      <span id="f4546">Did he know the head-luna of the plantation? </span>
      <span id="f4547"> Yes, and had had a couple of drinks with him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4548">And so they reminiscenced and drowned their hunger in the raw, sour wine. </span>
      <span id="f4549">To Martin the future did not seem so dim. </span>
      <span id="f4550"> Success trembled just before him. </span>
      <span id="f4551"> He was on the verge of clasping it. </span>
      <span id="f4552"> Then he studied the deep-lined face of the toil-worn woman before him, remembered her soups and loaves of new baking, and felt spring up in him the warmest gratitude and philanthropy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4553">&#34;Maria,&#34; he exclaimed suddenly. </span>
      <span id="f4554"> &#34;What would you like to have?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4555">She looked at him, bepuzzled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4556">&#34;What would you like to have now, right now, if you could get it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4557">&#34;Shoe alla da roun&#39; for da childs--seven pairs da shoe.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4558">&#34;You shall have them,&#34; he announced, while she nodded her head gravely. </span>
      <span id="f4559">&#34;But I mean a big wish, something big that you want.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4560">Her eyes sparkled good-naturedly. </span>
      <span id="f4561"> He was choosing to make fun with her, Maria, with whom few made fun these days.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4562">&#34;Think hard,&#34; he cautioned, just as she was opening her mouth to speak.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4563">&#34;Alla right,&#34; she answered. </span>
      <span id="f4564"> &#34;I thinka da hard. </span>
      <span id="f4565"> I lika da house, dis house--all mine, no paya da rent, seven dollar da month.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4566">&#34;You shall have it,&#34; he granted, &#34;and in a short time. </span>
      <span id="f4567"> Now wish the great wish. </span>
      <span id="f4568"> Make believe I am God, and I say to you anything you want you can have. </span>
      <span id="f4569"> Then you wish that thing, and I listen.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4570">Maria considered solemnly for a space.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4571">&#34;You no &#39;fraid?&#34; she asked warningly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4572">&#34;No, no,&#34; he laughed, &#34;I&#39;m not afraid. </span>
      <span id="f4573"> Go ahead.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4574">&#34;Most verra big,&#34; she warned again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4575">&#34;All right. </span>
      <span id="f4576"> Fire away.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4577">&#34;Well, den--&#34;  She drew a big breath like a child, as she voiced to the uttermost all she cared to demand of life. </span>
      <span id="f4578"> &#34;I lika da have one milka ranch--good milka ranch. </span>
      <span id="f4579"> Plenty cow, plenty land, plenty grass. </span>
      <span id="f4580"> I lika da have near San Le-an; my sister liva dere. </span>
      <span id="f4581"> I sella da milk in Oakland. </span>
      <span id="f4582">I maka da plentee mon. </span>
      <span id="f4583"> Joe an&#39; Nick no runna da cow. </span>
      <span id="f4584"> Dey go-a to school. </span>
      <span id="f4585"> Bimeby maka da good engineer, worka da railroad. </span>
      <span id="f4586"> Yes, I lika da milka ranch.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4587">She paused and regarded Martin with twinkling eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4588">&#34;You shall have it,&#34; he answered promptly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4589">She nodded her head and touched her lips courteously to the wine-glass and to the giver of the gift she knew would never be given. </span>
      <span id="f4590"> His heart was right, and in her own heart she appreciated his intention as much as if the gift had gone with it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4591">&#34;No, Maria,&#34; he went on; &#34;Nick and Joe won&#39;t have to peddle milk, and all the kids can go to school and wear shoes the whole year round. </span>
      <span id="f4592"> It will be a first-class milk ranch--everything complete. </span>
      <span id="f4593"> There will be a house to live in and a stable for the horses, and cow-barns, of course. </span>
      <span id="f4594"> There will be chickens, pigs, vegetables, fruit trees, and everything like that; and there will be enough cows to pay for a hired man or two. </span>
      <span id="f4595"> Then you won&#39;t have anything to do but take care of the children. </span>
      <span id="f4596"> For that matter, if you find a good man, you can marry and take it easy while he runs the ranch.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4597">And from such largess, dispensed from his future, Martin turned and took his one good suit of clothes to the pawnshop. </span>
      <span id="f4598"> His plight was desperate for him to do this, for it cut him off from Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f4599"> He had no second-best suit that was presentable, and though he could go to the butcher and the baker, and even on occasion to his sister&#39;s, it was beyond all daring to dream of entering the Morse home so disreputably apparelled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4600">He toiled on, miserable and well-nigh hopeless. </span>
      <span id="f4601"> It began to appear to him that the second battle was lost and that he would have to go to work. </span>
      <span id="f4602">In doing this he would satisfy everybody--the grocer, his sister, Ruth, and even Maria, to whom he owed a month&#39;s room rent. </span>
      <span id="f4603"> He was two months behind with his type-writer, and the agency was clamoring for payment or for the return of the machine. </span>
      <span id="f4604"> In desperation, all but ready to surrender, to make a truce with fate until he could get a fresh start, he took the civil service examinations for the Railway Mail. </span>
      <span id="f4605"> To his surprise, he passed first. </span>
      <span id="f4606"> The job was assured, though when the call would come to enter upon his duties nobody knew.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4607">It was at this time, at the lowest ebb, that the smooth-running editorial machine broke down. </span>
      <span id="f4608"> A cog must have slipped or an oil-cup run dry, for the postman brought him one morning a short, thin envelope. </span>
      <span id="f4609"> Martin glanced at the upper left-hand corner and read the name and address of the Transcontinental Monthly. </span>
      <span id="f4610"> His heart gave a great leap, and he suddenly felt faint, the sinking feeling accompanied by a strange trembling of the knees. </span>
      <span id="f4611"> He staggered into his room and sat down on the bed, the envelope still unopened, and in that moment came understanding to him how people suddenly fall dead upon receipt of extraordinarily good news.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4612">Of course this was good news. </span>
      <span id="f4613"> There was no manuscript in that thin envelope, therefore it was an acceptance. </span>
      <span id="f4614"> He knew the story in the hands of the Transcontinental. </span>
      <span id="f4615"> It was &#34;The Ring of Bells,&#34; one of his horror stories, and it was an even five thousand words. </span>
      <span id="f4616"> And, since first-class magazines always paid on acceptance, there was a check inside. </span>
      <span id="f4617"> Two cents a word--twenty dollars a thousand; the check must be a hundred dollars. </span>
      <span id="f4618">One hundred dollars! </span>
      <span id="f4619"> As he tore the envelope open, every item of all his debts surged in his brain--$3.85 to the grocer; butcher $4.00 flat; baker, $2.00; fruit store, $5.00; total, $14.85. </span>
      <span id="f4620"> Then there was room rent, $2.50; another month in advance, $2.50; two months&#39; type-writer, $8.00; a month in advance, $4.00; total, $31.85. </span>
      <span id="f4621"> And finally to be added, his pledges, plus interest, with the pawnbroker--watch, $5.50; overcoat, $5.50; wheel, $7.75; suit of clothes, $5.50 (60 % interest, but what did it matter?)--grand total, $56.10. </span>
      <span id="f4622"> He saw, as if visible in the air before him, in illuminated figures, the whole sum, and the subtraction that followed and that gave a remainder of $43.90. </span>
      <span id="f4623"> When he had squared every debt, redeemed every pledge, he would still have jingling in his pockets a princely $43.90. </span>
      <span id="f4624"> And on top of that he would have a month&#39;s rent paid in advance on the type-writer and on the room.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4625">By this time he had drawn the single sheet of type-written letter out and spread it open. </span>
      <span id="f4626"> There was no check. </span>
      <span id="f4627"> He peered into the envelope, held it to the light, but could not trust his eyes, and in trembling haste tore the envelope apart. </span>
      <span id="f4628"> There was no check. </span>
      <span id="f4629"> He read the letter, skimming it line by line, dashing through the editor&#39;s praise of his story to the meat of the letter, the statement why the check had not been sent. </span>
      <span id="f4630"> He found no such statement, but he did find that which made him suddenly wilt. </span>
      <span id="f4631"> The letter slid from his hand. </span>
      <span id="f4632"> His eyes went lack-lustre, and he lay back on the pillow, pulling the blanket about him and up to his chin.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4633">Five dollars for &#34;The Ring of Bells&#34;--five dollars for five thousand words! </span>
      <span id="f4634"> Instead of two cents a word, ten words for a cent! </span>
      <span id="f4635"> And the editor had praised it, too. </span>
      <span id="f4636"> And he would receive the check when the story was published. </span>
      <span id="f4637"> Then it was all poppycock, two cents a word for minimum rate and payment upon acceptance. </span>
      <span id="f4638"> It was a lie, and it had led him astray. </span>
      <span id="f4639"> He would never have attempted to write had he known that. </span>
      <span id="f4640"> He would have gone to work--to work for Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f4641"> He went back to the day he first attempted to write, and was appalled at the enormous waste of time--and all for ten words for a cent. </span>
      <span id="f4642"> And the other high rewards of writers, that he had read about, must be lies, too. </span>
      <span id="f4643"> His second-hand ideas of authorship were wrong, for here was the proof of it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4644">The Transcontinental sold for twenty-five cents, and its dignified and artistic cover proclaimed it as among the first-class magazines. </span>
      <span id="f4645"> It was a staid, respectable magazine, and it had been published continuously since long before he was born. </span>
      <span id="f4646"> Why, on the outside cover were printed every month the words of one of the world&#39;s great writers, words proclaiming the inspired mission of the Transcontinental by a star of literature whose first coruscations had appeared inside those self-same covers. </span>
      <span id="f4647"> And the high and lofty, heaven-inspired Transcontinental paid five dollars for five thousand words! </span>
      <span id="f4648"> The great writer had recently died in a foreign land--in dire poverty, Martin remembered, which was not to be wondered at, considering the magnificent pay authors receive.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4649">Well, he had taken the bait, the newspaper lies about writers and their pay, and he had wasted two years over it. </span>
      <span id="f4650"> But he would disgorge the bait now. </span>
      <span id="f4651"> Not another line would he ever write. </span>
      <span id="f4652"> He would do what Ruth wanted him to do, what everybody wanted him to do--get a job. </span>
      <span id="f4653"> The thought of going to work reminded him of Joe--Joe, tramping through the land of nothing-to-do. </span>
      <span id="f4654"> Martin heaved a great sigh of envy. </span>
      <span id="f4655"> The reaction of nineteen hours a day for many days was strong upon him. </span>
      <span id="f4656"> But then, Joe was not in love, had none of the responsibilities of love, and he could afford to loaf through the land of nothing-to-do. </span>
      <span id="f4657"> He, Martin, had something to work for, and go to work he would. </span>
      <span id="f4658"> He would start out early next morning to hunt a job. </span>
      <span id="f4659"> And he would let Ruth know, too, that he had mended his ways and was willing to go into her father&#39;s office.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4660">Five dollars for five thousand words, ten words for a cent, the market price for art. </span>
      <span id="f4661"> The disappointment of it, the lie of it, the infamy of it, were uppermost in his thoughts; and under his closed eyelids, in fiery figures, burned the &#34;$3.85&#34; he owed the grocer. </span>
      <span id="f4662"> He shivered, and was aware of an aching in his bones. </span>
      <span id="f4663"> The small of his back ached especially. </span>
      <span id="f4664"> His head ached, the top of it ached, the back of it ached, the brains inside of it ached and seemed to be swelling, while the ache over his brows was intolerable. </span>
      <span id="f4665"> And beneath the brows, planted under his lids, was the merciless &#34;$3.85.&#34;  He opened his eyes to escape it, but the white light of the room seemed to sear the balls and forced him to close his eyes, when the &#34;$3.85&#34; confronted him again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4666">Five dollars for five thousand words, ten words for a cent--that particular thought took up its residence in his brain, and he could no more escape it than he could the &#34;$3.85&#34; under his eyelids. </span>
      <span id="f4667"> A change seemed to come over the latter, and he watched curiously, till &#34;$2.00&#34; burned in its stead. </span>
      <span id="f4668"> Ah, he thought, that was the baker. </span>
      <span id="f4669"> The next sum that appeared was &#34;$2.50.&#34;  It puzzled him, and he pondered it as if life and death hung on the solution. </span>
      <span id="f4670"> He owed somebody two dollars and a half, that was certain, but who was it? </span>
      <span id="f4671"> To find it was the task set him by an imperious and malignant universe, and he wandered through the endless corridors of his mind, opening all manner of lumber rooms and chambers stored with odds and ends of memories and knowledge as he vainly sought the answer. </span>
      <span id="f4672"> After several centuries it came to him, easily, without effort, that it was Maria. </span>
      <span id="f4673"> With a great relief he turned his soul to the screen of torment under his lids. </span>
      <span id="f4674"> He had solved the problem; now he could rest. </span>
      <span id="f4675"> But no, the &#34;$2.50&#34; faded away, and in its place burned &#34;$8.00.&#34;  Who was that? </span>
      <span id="f4676"> He must go the dreary round of his mind again and find out.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4677">How long he was gone on this quest he did not know, but after what seemed an enormous lapse of time, he was called back to himself by a knock at the door, and by Maria&#39;s asking if he was sick. </span>
      <span id="f4678"> He replied in a muffled voice he did not recognize, saying that he was merely taking a nap. </span>
      <span id="f4679"> He was surprised when he noted the darkness of night in the room. </span>
      <span id="f4680"> He had received the letter at two in the afternoon, and he realized that he was sick.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4681">Then the &#34;$8.00&#34; began to smoulder under his lids again, and he returned himself to servitude. </span>
      <span id="f4682"> But he grew cunning. </span>
      <span id="f4683"> There was no need for him to wander through his mind. </span>
      <span id="f4684"> He had been a fool. </span>
      <span id="f4685"> He pulled a lever and made his mind revolve about him, a monstrous wheel of fortune, a merry-go-round of memory, a revolving sphere of wisdom. </span>
      <span id="f4686"> Faster and faster it revolved, until its vortex sucked him in and he was flung whirling through black chaos.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4687">Quite naturally he found himself at a mangle, feeding starched cuffs. </span>
      <span id="f4688"> But as he fed he noticed figures printed in the cuffs. </span>
      <span id="f4689"> It was a new way of marking linen, he thought, until, looking closer, he saw &#34;$3.85&#34; on one of the cuffs. </span>
      <span id="f4690"> Then it came to him that it was the grocer&#39;s bill, and that these were his bills flying around on the drum of the mangle. </span>
      <span id="f4691"> A crafty idea came to him. </span>
      <span id="f4692"> He would throw the bills on the floor and so escape paying them. </span>
      <span id="f4693"> No sooner thought than done, and he crumpled the cuffs spitefully as he flung them upon an unusually dirty floor. </span>
      <span id="f4694"> Ever the heap grew, and though each bill was duplicated a thousand times, he found only one for two dollars and a half, which was what he owed Maria. </span>
      <span id="f4695">That meant that Maria would not press for payment, and he resolved generously that it would be the only one he would pay; so he began searching through the cast-out heap for hers. </span>
      <span id="f4696"> He sought it desperately, for ages, and was still searching when the manager of the hotel entered, the fat Dutchman. </span>
      <span id="f4697"> His face blazed with wrath, and he shouted in stentorian tones that echoed down the universe, &#34;I shall deduct the cost of those cuffs from your wages!&#34;  The pile of cuffs grew into a mountain, and Martin knew that he was doomed to toil for a thousand years to pay for them. </span>
      <span id="f4698"> Well, there was nothing left to do but kill the manager and burn down the laundry. </span>
      <span id="f4699"> But the big Dutchman frustrated him, seizing him by the nape of the neck and dancing him up and down. </span>
      <span id="f4700"> He danced him over the ironing tables, the stove, and the mangles, and out into the wash- room and over the wringer and washer. </span>
      <span id="f4701"> Martin was danced until his teeth rattled and his head ached, and he marvelled that the Dutchman was so strong.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4702">And then he found himself before the mangle, this time receiving the cuffs an editor of a magazine was feeding from the other side. </span>
      <span id="f4703"> Each cuff was a check, and Martin went over them anxiously, in a fever of expectation, but they were all blanks. </span>
      <span id="f4704"> He stood there and received the blanks for a million years or so, never letting one go by for fear it might be filled out. </span>
      <span id="f4705"> At last he found it. </span>
      <span id="f4706"> With trembling fingers he held it to the light. </span>
      <span id="f4707"> It was for five dollars. </span>
      <span id="f4708"> &#34;Ha! </span>
      <span id="f4709">Ha!&#34; laughed the editor across the mangle. </span>
      <span id="f4710"> &#34;Well, then, I shall kill you,&#34; Martin said. </span>
      <span id="f4711">He went out into the wash-room to get the axe, and found Joe starching manuscripts. </span>
      <span id="f4712"> He tried to make him desist, then swung the axe for him. </span>
      <span id="f4713">But the weapon remained poised in mid-air, for Martin found himself back in the ironing room in the midst of a snow-storm. </span>
      <span id="f4714"> No, it was not snow that was falling, but checks of large denomination, the smallest not less than a thousand dollars. </span>
      <span id="f4715"> He began to collect them and sort them out, in packages of a hundred, tying each package securely with twine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4716">He looked up from his task and saw Joe standing before him juggling flat- irons, starched shirts, and manuscripts. </span>
      <span id="f4717"> Now and again he reached out and added a bundle of checks to the flying miscellany that soared through the roof and out of sight in a tremendous circle. </span>
      <span id="f4718"> Martin struck at him, but he seized the axe and added it to the flying circle. </span>
      <span id="f4719"> Then he plucked Martin and added him. </span>
      <span id="f4720"> Martin went up through the roof, clutching at manuscripts, so that by the time he came down he had a large armful. </span>
      <span id="f4721"> But no sooner down than up again, and a second and a third time and countless times he flew around the circle. </span>
      <span id="f4722"> From far off he could hear a childish treble singing: &#34;Waltz me around again, Willie, around, around, around.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4723">He recovered the axe in the midst of the Milky Way of checks, starched shirts, and manuscripts, and prepared, when he came down, to kill Joe. </span>
      <span id="f4724">But he did not come down. </span>
      <span id="f4725"> Instead, at two in the morning, Maria, having heard his groans through the thin partition, came into his room, to put hot flat-irons against his body and damp cloths upon his aching eyes.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>