<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XXVI</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f4726">CHAPTER XXVI</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f4727">Martin Eden did not go out to hunt for a job in the morning. </span>
      <span id="f4728"> It was late afternoon before he came out of his delirium and gazed with aching eyes about the room. </span>
      <span id="f4729"> Mary, one of the tribe of Silva, eight years old, keeping watch, raised a screech at sight of his returning consciousness. </span>
      <span id="f4730">Maria hurried into the room from the kitchen. </span>
      <span id="f4731"> She put her work-calloused hand upon his hot forehead and felt his pulse.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4732">&#34;You lika da eat?&#34; she asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4733">He shook his head. </span>
      <span id="f4734"> Eating was farthest from his desire, and he wondered that he should ever have been hungry in his life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4735">&#34;I&#39;m sick, Maria,&#34; he said weakly. </span>
      <span id="f4736"> &#34;What is it? </span>
      <span id="f4737"> Do you know?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4738">&#34;Grip,&#34; she answered. </span>
      <span id="f4739"> &#34;Two or three days you alla da right. </span>
      <span id="f4740"> Better you no eat now. </span>
      <span id="f4741"> Bimeby plenty can eat, to-morrow can eat maybe.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4742">Martin was not used to sickness, and when Maria and her little girl left him, he essayed to get up and dress. </span>
      <span id="f4743"> By a supreme exertion of will, with rearing brain and eyes that ached so that he could not keep them open, he managed to get out of bed, only to be left stranded by his senses upon the table. </span>
      <span id="f4744"> Half an hour later he managed to regain the bed, where he was content to lie with closed eyes and analyze his various pains and weaknesses. </span>
      <span id="f4745"> Maria came in several times to change the cold cloths on his forehead. </span>
      <span id="f4746"> Otherwise she left him in peace, too wise to vex him with chatter. </span>
      <span id="f4747"> This moved him to gratitude, and he murmured to himself, &#34;Maria, you getta da milka ranch, all righta, all right.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4748">Then he remembered his long-buried past of yesterday.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4749">It seemed a life-time since he had received that letter from the Transcontinental, a life-time since it was all over and done with and a new page turned. </span>
      <span id="f4750"> He had shot his bolt, and shot it hard, and now he was down on his back. </span>
      <span id="f4751"> If he hadn&#39;t starved himself, he wouldn&#39;t have been caught by La Grippe. </span>
      <span id="f4752"> He had been run down, and he had not had the strength to throw off the germ of disease which had invaded his system. </span>
      <span id="f4753">This was what resulted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4754">&#34;What does it profit a man to write a whole library and lose his own life?&#34; he demanded aloud. </span>
      <span id="f4755"> &#34;This is no place for me. </span>
      <span id="f4756"> No more literature in mine. </span>
      <span id="f4757"> Me for the counting-house and ledger, the monthly salary, and the little home with Ruth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4758">Two days later, having eaten an egg and two slices of toast and drunk a cup of tea, he asked for his mail, but found his eyes still hurt too much to permit him to read.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4759">&#34;You read for me, Maria,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f4760"> &#34;Never mind the big, long letters. </span>
      <span id="f4761">Throw them under the table. </span>
      <span id="f4762"> Read me the small letters.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4763">&#34;No can,&#34; was the answer. </span>
      <span id="f4764"> &#34;Teresa, she go to school, she can.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4765">So Teresa Silva, aged nine, opened his letters and read them to him. </span>
      <span id="f4766"> He listened absently to a long dun from the type-writer people, his mind busy with ways and means of finding a job. </span>
      <span id="f4767"> Suddenly he was shocked back to himself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4768">&#34;&#39;We offer you forty dollars for all serial rights in your story,&#39;&#34; Teresa slowly spelled out, &#34;&#39;provided you allow us to make the alterations suggested.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4769">&#34;What magazine is that?&#34; Martin shouted. </span>
      <span id="f4770"> &#34;Here, give it to me!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4771">He could see to read, now, and he was unaware of the pain of the action. </span>
      <span id="f4772">It was the White Mouse that was offering him forty dollars, and the story was &#34;The Whirlpool,&#34; another of his early horror stories. </span>
      <span id="f4773"> He read the letter through again and again. </span>
      <span id="f4774"> The editor told him plainly that he had not handled the idea properly, but that it was the idea they were buying because it was original. </span>
      <span id="f4775"> If they could cut the story down one-third, they would take it and send him forty dollars on receipt of his answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4776">He called for pen and ink, and told the editor he could cut the story down three-thirds if he wanted to, and to send the forty dollars right along.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4777">The letter despatched to the letter-box by Teresa, Martin lay back and thought. </span>
      <span id="f4778"> It wasn&#39;t a lie, after all. </span>
      <span id="f4779"> The White Mouse paid on acceptance. </span>
      <span id="f4780"> There were three thousand words in &#34;The Whirlpool.&#34;  Cut down a third, there would be two thousand. </span>
      <span id="f4781"> At forty dollars that would be two cents a word. </span>
      <span id="f4782"> Pay on acceptance and two cents a word--the newspapers had told the truth. </span>
      <span id="f4783"> And he had thought the White Mouse a third-rater! </span>
      <span id="f4784"> It was evident that he did not know the magazines. </span>
      <span id="f4785"> He had deemed the Transcontinental a first-rater, and it paid a cent for ten words. </span>
      <span id="f4786"> He had classed the White Mouse as of no account, and it paid twenty times as much as the Transcontinental and also had paid on acceptance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4787">Well, there was one thing certain: when he got well, he would not go out looking for a job. </span>
      <span id="f4788"> There were more stories in his head as good as &#34;The Whirlpool,&#34; and at forty dollars apiece he could earn far more than in any job or position. </span>
      <span id="f4789"> Just when he thought the battle lost, it was won. </span>
      <span id="f4790">He had proved for his career. </span>
      <span id="f4791"> The way was clear. </span>
      <span id="f4792"> Beginning with the White Mouse he would add magazine after magazine to his growing list of patrons. </span>
      <span id="f4793"> Hack-work could be put aside. </span>
      <span id="f4794"> For that matter, it had been wasted time, for it had not brought him a dollar. </span>
      <span id="f4795"> He would devote himself to work, good work, and he would pour out the best that was in him. </span>
      <span id="f4796"> He wished Ruth was there to share in his joy, and when he went over the letters left lying on his bed, he found one from her. </span>
      <span id="f4797"> It was sweetly reproachful, wondering what had kept him away for so dreadful a length of time. </span>
      <span id="f4798"> He reread the letter adoringly, dwelling over her handwriting, loving each stroke of her pen, and in the end kissing her signature.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4799">And when he answered, he told her recklessly that he had not been to see her because his best clothes were in pawn. </span>
      <span id="f4800"> He told her that he had been sick, but was once more nearly well, and that inside ten days or two weeks (as soon as a letter could travel to New York City and return) he would redeem his clothes and be with her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4801">But Ruth did not care to wait ten days or two weeks. </span>
      <span id="f4802"> Besides, her lover was sick. </span>
      <span id="f4803"> The next afternoon, accompanied by Arthur, she arrived in the Morse carriage, to the unqualified delight of the Silva tribe and of all the urchins on the street, and to the consternation of Maria. </span>
      <span id="f4804"> She boxed the ears of the Silvas who crowded about the visitors on the tiny front porch, and in more than usual atrocious English tried to apologize for her appearance. </span>
      <span id="f4805"> Sleeves rolled up from soap-flecked arms and a wet gunny- sack around her waist told of the task at which she had been caught. </span>
      <span id="f4806"> So flustered was she by two such grand young people asking for her lodger, that she forgot to invite them to sit down in the little parlor. </span>
      <span id="f4807"> To enter Martin&#39;s room, they passed through the kitchen, warm and moist and steamy from the big washing in progress. </span>
      <span id="f4808"> Maria, in her excitement, jammed the bedroom and bedroom-closet doors together, and for five minutes, through the partly open door, clouds of steam, smelling of soap- suds and dirt, poured into the sick chamber.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4809">Ruth succeeded in veering right and left and right again, and in running the narrow passage between table and bed to Martin&#39;s side; but Arthur veered too wide and fetched up with clatter and bang of pots and pans in the corner where Martin did his cooking. </span>
      <span id="f4810"> Arthur did not linger long. </span>
      <span id="f4811">Ruth occupied the only chair, and having done his duty, he went outside and stood by the gate, the centre of seven marvelling Silvas, who watched him as they would have watched a curiosity in a side-show. </span>
      <span id="f4812"> All about the carriage were gathered the children from a dozen blocks, waiting and eager for some tragic and terrible denouement. </span>
      <span id="f4813"> Carriages were seen on their street only for weddings and funerals. </span>
      <span id="f4814"> Here was neither marriage nor death: therefore, it was something transcending experience and well worth waiting for.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4815">Martin had been wild to see Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f4816"> His was essentially a love-nature, and he possessed more than the average man&#39;s need for sympathy. </span>
      <span id="f4817"> He was starving for sympathy, which, with him, meant intelligent understanding; and he had yet to learn that Ruth&#39;s sympathy was largely sentimental and tactful, and that it proceeded from gentleness of nature rather than from understanding of the objects of her sympathy. </span>
      <span id="f4818"> So it was while Martin held her hand and gladly talked, that her love for him prompted her to press his hand in return, and that her eyes were moist and luminous at sight of his helplessness and of the marks suffering had stamped upon his face.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4819">But while he told her of his two acceptances, of his despair when he received the one from the Transcontinental, and of the corresponding delight with which he received the one from the White Mouse, she did not follow him. </span>
      <span id="f4820"> She heard the words he uttered and understood their literal import, but she was not with him in his despair and his delight. </span>
      <span id="f4821"> She could not get out of herself. </span>
      <span id="f4822"> She was not interested in selling stories to magazines. </span>
      <span id="f4823"> What was important to her was matrimony. </span>
      <span id="f4824"> She was not aware of it, however, any more than she was aware that her desire that Martin take a position was the instinctive and preparative impulse of motherhood. </span>
      <span id="f4825"> She would have blushed had she been told as much in plain, set terms, and next, she might have grown indignant and asserted that her sole interest lay in the man she loved and her desire for him to make the best of himself. </span>
      <span id="f4826"> So, while Martin poured out his heart to her, elated with the first success his chosen work in the world had received, she paid heed to his bare words only, gazing now and again about the room, shocked by what she saw.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4827">For the first time Ruth gazed upon the sordid face of poverty. </span>
      <span id="f4828"> Starving lovers had always seemed romantic to her,--but she had had no idea how starving lovers lived. </span>
      <span id="f4829"> She had never dreamed it could be like this. </span>
      <span id="f4830"> Ever her gaze shifted from the room to him and back again. </span>
      <span id="f4831"> The steamy smell of dirty clothes, which had entered with her from the kitchen, was sickening. </span>
      <span id="f4832"> Martin must be soaked with it, Ruth concluded, if that awful woman washed frequently. </span>
      <span id="f4833"> Such was the contagiousness of degradation. </span>
      <span id="f4834">When she looked at Martin, she seemed to see the smirch left upon him by his surroundings. </span>
      <span id="f4835"> She had never seen him unshaven, and the three days&#39; growth of beard on his face was repulsive to her. </span>
      <span id="f4836"> Not alone did it give him the same dark and murky aspect of the Silva house, inside and out, but it seemed to emphasize that animal-like strength of his which she detested. </span>
      <span id="f4837"> And here he was, being confirmed in his madness by the two acceptances he took such pride in telling her about. </span>
      <span id="f4838"> A little longer and he would have surrendered and gone to work. </span>
      <span id="f4839"> Now he would continue on in this horrible house, writing and starving for a few more months.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4840">&#34;What is that smell?&#34; she asked suddenly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4841">&#34;Some of Maria&#39;s washing smells, I imagine,&#34; was the answer. </span>
      <span id="f4842"> &#34;I am growing quite accustomed to them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4843">&#34;No, no; not that. </span>
      <span id="f4844"> It is something else. </span>
      <span id="f4845"> A stale, sickish smell.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4846">Martin sampled the air before replying.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4847">&#34;I can&#39;t smell anything else, except stale tobacco smoke,&#34; he announced.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4848">&#34;That&#39;s it. </span>
      <span id="f4849"> It is terrible. </span>
      <span id="f4850"> Why do you smoke so much, Martin?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4851">&#34;I don&#39;t know, except that I smoke more than usual when I am lonely. </span>
      <span id="f4852"> And then, too, it&#39;s such a long-standing habit. </span>
      <span id="f4853"> I learned when I was only a youngster.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4854">&#34;It is not a nice habit, you know,&#34; she reproved. </span>
      <span id="f4855"> &#34;It smells to heaven.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4856">&#34;That&#39;s the fault of the tobacco. </span>
      <span id="f4857"> I can afford only the cheapest. </span>
      <span id="f4858"> But wait until I get that forty-dollar check. </span>
      <span id="f4859"> I&#39;ll use a brand that is not offensive even to the angels. </span>
      <span id="f4860"> But that wasn&#39;t so bad, was it, two acceptances in three days? </span>
      <span id="f4861"> That forty-five dollars will pay about all my debts.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4862">&#34;For two years&#39; work?&#34; she queried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4863">&#34;No, for less than a week&#39;s work. </span>
      <span id="f4864"> Please pass me that book over on the far corner of the table, the account book with the gray cover.&#34;  He opened it and began turning over the pages rapidly. </span>
      <span id="f4865"> &#34;Yes, I was right. </span>
      <span id="f4866">Four days for &#39;The Ring of Bells,&#39; two days for &#39;The Whirlpool.&#39;  That&#39;s forty-five dollars for a week&#39;s work, one hundred and eighty dollars a month. </span>
      <span id="f4867"> That beats any salary I can command. </span>
      <span id="f4868"> And, besides, I&#39;m just beginning. </span>
      <span id="f4869"> A thousand dollars a month is not too much to buy for you all I want you to have. </span>
      <span id="f4870"> A salary of five hundred a month would be too small. </span>
      <span id="f4871">That forty-five dollars is just a starter. </span>
      <span id="f4872"> Wait till I get my stride. </span>
      <span id="f4873">Then watch my smoke.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4874">Ruth misunderstood his slang, and reverted to cigarettes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4875">&#34;You smoke more than enough as it is, and the brand of tobacco will make no difference. </span>
      <span id="f4876"> It is the smoking itself that is not nice, no matter what the brand may be. </span>
      <span id="f4877"> You are a chimney, a living volcano, a perambulating smoke-stack, and you are a perfect disgrace, Martin dear, you know you are.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4878">She leaned toward him, entreaty in her eyes, and as he looked at her delicate face and into her pure, limpid eyes, as of old he was struck with his own unworthiness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4879">&#34;I wish you wouldn&#39;t smoke any more,&#34; she whispered. </span>
      <span id="f4880"> &#34;Please, for--my sake.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4881">&#34;All right, I won&#39;t,&#34; he cried. </span>
      <span id="f4882"> &#34;I&#39;ll do anything you ask, dear love, anything; you know that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4883">A great temptation assailed her. </span>
      <span id="f4884"> In an insistent way she had caught glimpses of the large, easy-going side of his nature, and she felt sure, if she asked him to cease attempting to write, that he would grant her wish. </span>
      <span id="f4885"> In the swift instant that elapsed, the words trembled on her lips. </span>
      <span id="f4886">But she did not utter them. </span>
      <span id="f4887"> She was not quite brave enough; she did not quite dare. </span>
      <span id="f4888"> Instead, she leaned toward him to meet him, and in his arms murmured:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4889">&#34;You know, it is really not for my sake, Martin, but for your own. </span>
      <span id="f4890"> I am sure smoking hurts you; and besides, it is not good to be a slave to anything, to a drug least of all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4891">&#34;I shall always be your slave,&#34; he smiled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4892">&#34;In which case, I shall begin issuing my commands.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4893">She looked at him mischievously, though deep down she was already regretting that she had not preferred her largest request.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4894">&#34;I live but to obey, your majesty.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4895">&#34;Well, then, my first commandment is, Thou shalt not omit to shave every day. </span>
      <span id="f4896"> Look how you have scratched my cheek.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4897">And so it ended in caresses and love-laughter. </span>
      <span id="f4898"> But she had made one point, and she could not expect to make more than one at a time. </span>
      <span id="f4899"> She felt a woman&#39;s pride in that she had made him stop smoking. </span>
      <span id="f4900"> Another time she would persuade him to take a position, for had he not said he would do anything she asked?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4901">She left his side to explore the room, examining the clothes-lines of notes overhead, learning the mystery of the tackle used for suspending his wheel under the ceiling, and being saddened by the heap of manuscripts under the table which represented to her just so much wasted time. </span>
      <span id="f4902"> The oil-stove won her admiration, but on investigating the food shelves she found them empty.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4903">&#34;Why, you haven&#39;t anything to eat, you poor dear,&#34; she said with tender compassion. </span>
      <span id="f4904"> &#34;You must be starving.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4905">&#34;I store my food in Maria&#39;s safe and in her pantry,&#34; he lied. </span>
      <span id="f4906"> &#34;It keeps better there. </span>
      <span id="f4907"> No danger of my starving. </span>
      <span id="f4908"> Look at that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4909">She had come back to his side, and she saw him double his arm at the elbow, the biceps crawling under his shirt-sleeve and swelling into a knot of muscle, heavy and hard. </span>
      <span id="f4910"> The sight repelled her. </span>
      <span id="f4911"> Sentimentally, she disliked it. </span>
      <span id="f4912"> But her pulse, her blood, every fibre of her, loved it and yearned for it, and, in the old, inexplicable way, she leaned toward him, not away from him. </span>
      <span id="f4913"> And in the moment that followed, when he crushed her in his arms, the brain of her, concerned with the superficial aspects of life, was in revolt; while the heart of her, the woman of her, concerned with life itself, exulted triumphantly. </span>
      <span id="f4914"> It was in moments like this that she felt to the uttermost the greatness of her love for Martin, for it was almost a swoon of delight to her to feel his strong arms about her, holding her tightly, hurting her with the grip of their fervor. </span>
      <span id="f4915"> At such moments she found justification for her treason to her standards, for her violation of her own high ideals, and, most of all, for her tacit disobedience to her mother and father. </span>
      <span id="f4916"> They did not want her to marry this man. </span>
      <span id="f4917"> It shocked them that she should love him. </span>
      <span id="f4918"> It shocked her, too, sometimes, when she was apart from him, a cool and reasoning creature. </span>
      <span id="f4919"> With him, she loved him--in truth, at times a vexed and worried love; but love it was, a love that was stronger than she.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4920">&#34;This La Grippe is nothing,&#34; he was saying. </span>
      <span id="f4921"> &#34;It hurts a bit, and gives one a nasty headache, but it doesn&#39;t compare with break-bone fever.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4922">&#34;Have you had that, too?&#34; she queried absently, intent on the heaven-sent justification she was finding in his arms.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4923">And so, with absent queries, she led him on, till suddenly his words startled her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4924">He had had the fever in a secret colony of thirty lepers on one of the Hawaiian Islands.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4925">&#34;But why did you go there?&#34; she demanded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4926">Such royal carelessness of body seemed criminal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4927">&#34;Because I didn&#39;t know,&#34; he answered. </span>
      <span id="f4928"> &#34;I never dreamed of lepers. </span>
      <span id="f4929"> When I deserted the schooner and landed on the beach, I headed inland for some place of hiding. </span>
      <span id="f4930"> For three days I lived off guavas, ohia-apples, and bananas, all of which grew wild in the jungle. </span>
      <span id="f4931"> On the fourth day I found the trail--a mere foot-trail. </span>
      <span id="f4932"> It led inland, and it led up. </span>
      <span id="f4933"> It was the way I wanted to go, and it showed signs of recent travel. </span>
      <span id="f4934"> At one place it ran along the crest of a ridge that was no more than a knife-edge. </span>
      <span id="f4935"> The trail wasn&#39;t three feet wide on the crest, and on either side the ridge fell away in precipices hundreds of feet deep. </span>
      <span id="f4936"> One man, with plenty of ammunition, could have held it against a hundred thousand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4937">&#34;It was the only way in to the hiding-place. </span>
      <span id="f4938"> Three hours after I found the trail I was there, in a little mountain valley, a pocket in the midst of lava peaks. </span>
      <span id="f4939"> The whole place was terraced for taro-patches, fruit trees grew there, and there were eight or ten grass huts. </span>
      <span id="f4940"> But as soon as I saw the inhabitants I knew what I&#39;d struck. </span>
      <span id="f4941"> One sight of them was enough.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4942">&#34;What did you do?&#34; Ruth demanded breathlessly, listening, like any Desdemona, appalled and fascinated.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4943">&#34;Nothing for me to do. </span>
      <span id="f4944"> Their leader was a kind old fellow, pretty far gone, but he ruled like a king. </span>
      <span id="f4945"> He had discovered the little valley and founded the settlement--all of which was against the law. </span>
      <span id="f4946"> But he had guns, plenty of ammunition, and those Kanakas, trained to the shooting of wild cattle and wild pig, were dead shots. </span>
      <span id="f4947"> No, there wasn&#39;t any running away for Martin Eden. </span>
      <span id="f4948"> He stayed--for three months.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4949">&#34;But how did you escape?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4950">&#34;I&#39;d have been there yet, if it hadn&#39;t been for a girl there, a half-Chinese, quarter-white, and quarter-Hawaiian. </span>
      <span id="f4951"> She was a beauty, poor thing, and well educated. </span>
      <span id="f4952"> Her mother, in Honolulu, was worth a million or so. </span>
      <span id="f4953"> Well, this girl got me away at last. </span>
      <span id="f4954"> Her mother financed the settlement, you see, so the girl wasn&#39;t afraid of being punished for letting me go. </span>
      <span id="f4955"> But she made me swear, first, never to reveal the hiding- place; and I never have. </span>
      <span id="f4956"> This is the first time I have even mentioned it. </span>
      <span id="f4957"> The girl had just the first signs of leprosy. </span>
      <span id="f4958"> The fingers of her right hand were slightly twisted, and there was a small spot on her arm. </span>
      <span id="f4959">That was all. </span>
      <span id="f4960"> I guess she is dead, now.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4961">&#34;But weren&#39;t you frightened? </span>
      <span id="f4962"> And weren&#39;t you glad to get away without catching that dreadful disease?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4963">&#34;Well,&#34; he confessed, &#34;I was a bit shivery at first; but I got used to it. </span>
      <span id="f4964"> I used to feel sorry for that poor girl, though. </span>
      <span id="f4965"> That made me forget to be afraid. </span>
      <span id="f4966"> She was such a beauty, in spirit as well as in appearance, and she was only slightly touched; yet she was doomed to lie there, living the life of a primitive savage and rotting slowly away. </span>
      <span id="f4967">Leprosy is far more terrible than you can imagine it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4968">&#34;Poor thing,&#34; Ruth murmured softly. </span>
      <span id="f4969"> &#34;It&#39;s a wonder she let you get away.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4970">&#34;How do you mean?&#34; Martin asked unwittingly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4971">&#34;Because she must have loved you,&#34; Ruth said, still softly. </span>
      <span id="f4972"> &#34;Candidly, now, didn&#39;t she?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4973">Martin&#39;s sunburn had been bleached by his work in the laundry and by the indoor life he was living, while the hunger and the sickness had made his face even pale; and across this pallor flowed the slow wave of a blush. </span>
      <span id="f4974">He was opening his mouth to speak, but Ruth shut him off.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4975">&#34;Never mind, don&#39;t answer; it&#39;s not necessary,&#34; she laughed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4976">But it seemed to him there was something metallic in her laughter, and that the light in her eyes was cold. </span>
      <span id="f4977"> On the spur of the moment it reminded him of a gale he had once experienced in the North Pacific. </span>
      <span id="f4978"> And for the moment the apparition of the gale rose before his eyes--a gale at night, with a clear sky and under a full moon, the huge seas glinting coldly in the moonlight. </span>
      <span id="f4979"> Next, he saw the girl in the leper refuge and remembered it was for love of him that she had let him go.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4980">&#34;She was noble,&#34; he said simply. </span>
      <span id="f4981"> &#34;She gave me life.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4982">That was all of the incident, but he heard Ruth muffle a dry sob in her throat, and noticed that she turned her face away to gaze out of the window. </span>
      <span id="f4983"> When she turned it back to him, it was composed, and there was no hint of the gale in her eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4984">&#34;I&#39;m such a silly,&#34; she said plaintively. </span>
      <span id="f4985"> &#34;But I can&#39;t help it. </span>
      <span id="f4986"> I do so love you, Martin, I do, I do. </span>
      <span id="f4987"> I shall grow more catholic in time, but at present I can&#39;t help being jealous of those ghosts of the past, and you know your past is full of ghosts.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4988">&#34;It must be,&#34; she silenced his protest. </span>
      <span id="f4989"> &#34;It could not be otherwise. </span>
      <span id="f4990"> And there&#39;s poor Arthur motioning me to come. </span>
      <span id="f4991"> He&#39;s tired waiting. </span>
      <span id="f4992"> And now good-by, dear.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4993">&#34;There&#39;s some kind of a mixture, put up by the druggists, that helps men to stop the use of tobacco,&#34; she called back from the door, &#34;and I am going to send you some.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4994">The door closed, but opened again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4995">&#34;I do, I do,&#34; she whispered to him; and this time she was really gone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4996">Maria, with worshipful eyes that none the less were keen to note the texture of Ruth&#39;s garments and the cut of them (a cut unknown that produced an effect mysteriously beautiful), saw her to the carriage. </span>
      <span id="f4997"> The crowd of disappointed urchins stared till the carriage disappeared from view, then transferred their stare to Maria, who had abruptly become the most important person on the street. </span>
      <span id="f4998"> But it was one of her progeny who blasted Maria&#39;s reputation by announcing that the grand visitors had been for her lodger. </span>
      <span id="f4999"> After that Maria dropped back into her old obscurity and Martin began to notice the respectful manner in which he was regarded by the small fry of the neighborhood. </span>
      <span id="f5000"> As for Maria, Martin rose in her estimation a full hundred per cent, and had the Portuguese grocer witnessed that afternoon carriage-call he would have allowed Martin an additional three-dollars-and-eighty-five-cents&#39; worth of credit.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>