<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XXVII</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f5001">CHAPTER XXVII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f5002">The sun of Martin&#39;s good fortune rose. </span>
      <span id="f5003"> The day after Ruth&#39;s visit, he received a check for three dollars from a New York scandal weekly in payment for three of his triolets. </span>
      <span id="f5004"> Two days later a newspaper published in Chicago accepted his &#34;Treasure Hunters,&#34; promising to pay ten dollars for it on publication. </span>
      <span id="f5005"> The price was small, but it was the first article he had written, his very first attempt to express his thought on the printed page. </span>
      <span id="f5006"> To cap everything, the adventure serial for boys, his second attempt, was accepted before the end of the week by a juvenile monthly calling itself Youth and Age. </span>
      <span id="f5007"> It was true the serial was twenty- one thousand words, and they offered to pay him sixteen dollars on publication, which was something like seventy-five cents a thousand words; but it was equally true that it was the second thing he had attempted to write and that he was himself thoroughly aware of its clumsy worthlessness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5008">But even his earliest efforts were not marked with the clumsiness of mediocrity. </span>
      <span id="f5009"> What characterized them was the clumsiness of too great strength--the clumsiness which the tyro betrays when he crushes butterflies with battering rams and hammers out vignettes with a war-club. </span>
      <span id="f5010"> So it was that Martin was glad to sell his early efforts for songs. </span>
      <span id="f5011"> He knew them for what they were, and it had not taken him long to acquire this knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f5012"> What he pinned his faith to was his later work. </span>
      <span id="f5013">He had striven to be something more than a mere writer of magazine fiction. </span>
      <span id="f5014"> He had sought to equip himself with the tools of artistry. </span>
      <span id="f5015"> On the other hand, he had not sacrificed strength. </span>
      <span id="f5016"> His conscious aim had been to increase his strength by avoiding excess of strength. </span>
      <span id="f5017"> Nor had he departed from his love of reality. </span>
      <span id="f5018"> His work was realism, though he had endeavored to fuse with it the fancies and beauties of imagination. </span>
      <span id="f5019"> What he sought was an impassioned realism, shot through with human aspiration and faith. </span>
      <span id="f5020"> What he wanted was life as it was, with all its spirit-groping and soul-reaching left in.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5021">He had discovered, in the course of his reading, two schools of fiction. </span>
      <span id="f5022">One treated of man as a god, ignoring his earthly origin; the other treated of man as a clod, ignoring his heaven-sent dreams and divine possibilities. </span>
      <span id="f5023"> Both the god and the clod schools erred, in Martin&#39;s estimation, and erred through too great singleness of sight and purpose. </span>
      <span id="f5024">There was a compromise that approximated the truth, though it flattered not the school of god, while it challenged the brute-savageness of the school of clod. </span>
      <span id="f5025"> It was his story, &#34;Adventure,&#34; which had dragged with Ruth, that Martin believed had achieved his ideal of the true in fiction; and it was in an essay, &#34;God and Clod,&#34; that he had expressed his views on the whole general subject.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5026">But &#34;Adventure,&#34; and all that he deemed his best work, still went begging among the editors. </span>
      <span id="f5027"> His early work counted for nothing in his eyes except for the money it brought, and his horror stories, two of which he had sold, he did not consider high work nor his best work. </span>
      <span id="f5028"> To him they were frankly imaginative and fantastic, though invested with all the glamour of the real, wherein lay their power. </span>
      <span id="f5029"> This investiture of the grotesque and impossible with reality, he looked upon as a trick--a skilful trick at best. </span>
      <span id="f5030"> Great literature could not reside in such a field. </span>
      <span id="f5031"> Their artistry was high, but he denied the worthwhileness of artistry when divorced from humanness. </span>
      <span id="f5032"> The trick had been to fling over the face of his artistry a mask of humanness, and this he had done in the half-dozen or so stories of the horror brand he had written before he emerged upon the high peaks of &#34;Adventure,&#34; &#34;Joy,&#34; &#34;The Pot,&#34; and &#34;The Wine of Life.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5033">The three dollars he received for the triolets he used to eke out a precarious existence against the arrival of the White Mouse check. </span>
      <span id="f5034"> He cashed the first check with the suspicious Portuguese grocer, paying a dollar on account and dividing the remaining two dollars between the baker and the fruit store. </span>
      <span id="f5035"> Martin was not yet rich enough to afford meat, and he was on slim allowance when the White Mouse check arrived. </span>
      <span id="f5036"> He was divided on the cashing of it. </span>
      <span id="f5037"> He had never been in a bank in his life, much less been in one on business, and he had a naive and childlike desire to walk into one of the big banks down in Oakland and fling down his indorsed check for forty dollars. </span>
      <span id="f5038"> On the other hand, practical common sense ruled that he should cash it with his grocer and thereby make an impression that would later result in an increase of credit. </span>
      <span id="f5039">Reluctantly Martin yielded to the claims of the grocer, paying his bill with him in full, and receiving in change a pocketful of jingling coin. </span>
      <span id="f5040">Also, he paid the other tradesmen in full, redeemed his suit and his bicycle, paid one month&#39;s rent on the type-writer, and paid Maria the overdue month for his room and a month in advance. </span>
      <span id="f5041"> This left him in his pocket, for emergencies, a balance of nearly three dollars.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5042">In itself, this small sum seemed a fortune. </span>
      <span id="f5043"> Immediately on recovering his clothes he had gone to see Ruth, and on the way he could not refrain from jingling the little handful of silver in his pocket. </span>
      <span id="f5044"> He had been so long without money that, like a rescued starving man who cannot let the unconsumed food out of his sight, Martin could not keep his hand off the silver. </span>
      <span id="f5045"> He was not mean, nor avaricious, but the money meant more than so many dollars and cents. </span>
      <span id="f5046"> It stood for success, and the eagles stamped upon the coins were to him so many winged victories.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5047">It came to him insensibly that it was a very good world. </span>
      <span id="f5048"> It certainly appeared more beautiful to him. </span>
      <span id="f5049"> For weeks it had been a very dull and sombre world; but now, with nearly all debts paid, three dollars jingling in his pocket, and in his mind the consciousness of success, the sun shone bright and warm, and even a rain-squall that soaked unprepared pedestrians seemed a merry happening to him. </span>
      <span id="f5050"> When he starved, his thoughts had dwelt often upon the thousands he knew were starving the world over; but now that he was feasted full, the fact of the thousands starving was no longer pregnant in his brain. </span>
      <span id="f5051"> He forgot about them, and, being in love, remembered the countless lovers in the world. </span>
      <span id="f5052"> Without deliberately thinking about it, motifs for love-lyrics began to agitate his brain. </span>
      <span id="f5053"> Swept away by the creative impulse, he got off the electric car, without vexation, two blocks beyond his crossing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5054">He found a number of persons in the Morse home. </span>
      <span id="f5055"> Ruth&#39;s two girl-cousins were visiting her from San Rafael, and Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f5056">Morse, under pretext of entertaining them, was pursuing her plan of surrounding Ruth with young people. </span>
      <span id="f5057"> The campaign had begun during Martin&#39;s enforced absence, and was already in full swing. </span>
      <span id="f5058"> She was making a point of having at the house men who were doing things. </span>
      <span id="f5059"> Thus, in addition to the cousins Dorothy and Florence, Martin encountered two university professors, one of Latin, the other of English; a young army officer just back from the Philippines, one-time school-mate of Ruth&#39;s; a young fellow named Melville, private secretary to Joseph Perkins, head of the San Francisco Trust Company; and finally of the men, a live bank cashier, Charles Hapgood, a youngish man of thirty-five, graduate of Stanford University, member of the Nile Club and the Unity Club, and a conservative speaker for the Republican Party during campaigns--in short, a rising young man in every way. </span>
      <span id="f5060"> Among the women was one who painted portraits, another who was a professional musician, and still another who possessed the degree of Doctor of Sociology and who was locally famous for her social settlement work in the slums of San Francisco. </span>
      <span id="f5061"> But the women did not count for much in Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f5062">Morse&#39;s plan. </span>
      <span id="f5063"> At the best, they were necessary accessories. </span>
      <span id="f5064"> The men who did things must be drawn to the house somehow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5065">&#34;Don&#39;t get excited when you talk,&#34; Ruth admonished Martin, before the ordeal of introduction began.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5066">He bore himself a bit stiffly at first, oppressed by a sense of his own awkwardness, especially of his shoulders, which were up to their old trick of threatening destruction to furniture and ornaments. </span>
      <span id="f5067"> Also, he was rendered self-conscious by the company. </span>
      <span id="f5068"> He had never before been in contact with such exalted beings nor with so many of them. </span>
      <span id="f5069"> Melville, the bank cashier, fascinated him, and he resolved to investigate him at the first opportunity. </span>
      <span id="f5070"> For underneath Martin&#39;s awe lurked his assertive ego, and he felt the urge to measure himself with these men and women and to find out what they had learned from the books and life which he had not learned.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5071">Ruth&#39;s eyes roved to him frequently to see how he was getting on, and she was surprised and gladdened by the ease with which he got acquainted with her cousins. </span>
      <span id="f5072"> He certainly did not grow excited, while being seated removed from him the worry of his shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f5073"> Ruth knew them for clever girls, superficially brilliant, and she could scarcely understand their praise of Martin later that night at going to bed. </span>
      <span id="f5074"> But he, on the other hand, a wit in his own class, a gay quizzer and laughter-maker at dances and Sunday picnics, had found the making of fun and the breaking of good- natured lances simple enough in this environment. </span>
      <span id="f5075"> And on this evening success stood at his back, patting him on the shoulder and telling him that he was making good, so that he could afford to laugh and make laughter and remain unabashed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5076">Later, Ruth&#39;s anxiety found justification. </span>
      <span id="f5077"> Martin and Professor Caldwell had got together in a conspicuous corner, and though Martin no longer wove the air with his hands, to Ruth&#39;s critical eye he permitted his own eyes to flash and glitter too frequently, talked too rapidly and warmly, grew too intense, and allowed his aroused blood to redden his cheeks too much. </span>
      <span id="f5078"> He lacked decorum and control, and was in decided contrast to the young professor of English with whom he talked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5079">But Martin was not concerned with appearances! </span>
      <span id="f5080"> He had been swift to note the other&#39;s trained mind and to appreciate his command of knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f5081">Furthermore, Professor Caldwell did not realize Martin&#39;s concept of the average English professor. </span>
      <span id="f5082"> Martin wanted him to talk shop, and, though he seemed averse at first, succeeded in making him do it. </span>
      <span id="f5083"> For Martin did not see why a man should not talk shop.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5084">&#34;It&#39;s absurd and unfair,&#34; he had told Ruth weeks before, &#34;this objection to talking shop. </span>
      <span id="f5085"> For what reason under the sun do men and women come together if not for the exchange of the best that is in them? </span>
      <span id="f5086"> And the best that is in them is what they are interested in, the thing by which they make their living, the thing they&#39;ve specialized on and sat up days and nights over, and even dreamed about. </span>
      <span id="f5087"> Imagine Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5088">Butler living up to social etiquette and enunciating his views on Paul Verlaine or the German drama or the novels of D&#39;Annunzio. </span>
      <span id="f5089"> We&#39;d be bored to death. </span>
      <span id="f5090"> I, for one, if I must listen to Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5091">Butler, prefer to hear him talk about his law. </span>
      <span id="f5092">It&#39;s the best that is in him, and life is so short that I want the best of every man and woman I meet.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5093">&#34;But,&#34; Ruth had objected, &#34;there are the topics of general interest to all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5094">&#34;There, you mistake,&#34; he had rushed on. </span>
      <span id="f5095"> &#34;All persons in society, all cliques in society--or, rather, nearly all persons and cliques--ape their betters. </span>
      <span id="f5096"> Now, who are the best betters? </span>
      <span id="f5097"> The idlers, the wealthy idlers. </span>
      <span id="f5098">They do not know, as a rule, the things known by the persons who are doing something in the world. </span>
      <span id="f5099"> To listen to conversation about such things would mean to be bored, wherefore the idlers decree that such things are shop and must not be talked about. </span>
      <span id="f5100"> Likewise they decree the things that are not shop and which may be talked about, and those things are the latest operas, latest novels, cards, billiards, cocktails, automobiles, horse shows, trout fishing, tuna-fishing, big-game shooting, yacht sailing, and so forth--and mark you, these are the things the idlers know. </span>
      <span id="f5101"> In all truth, they constitute the shop-talk of the idlers. </span>
      <span id="f5102">And the funniest part of it is that many of the clever people, and all the would-be clever people, allow the idlers so to impose upon them. </span>
      <span id="f5103"> As for me, I want the best a man&#39;s got in him, call it shop vulgarity or anything you please.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5104">And Ruth had not understood. </span>
      <span id="f5105"> This attack of his on the established had seemed to her just so much wilfulness of opinion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5106">So Martin contaminated Professor Caldwell with his own earnestness, challenging him to speak his mind. </span>
      <span id="f5107"> As Ruth paused beside them she heard Martin saying:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5108">&#34;You surely don&#39;t pronounce such heresies in the University of California?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5109">Professor Caldwell shrugged his shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f5110"> &#34;The honest taxpayer and the politician, you know. </span>
      <span id="f5111"> Sacramento gives us our appropriations and therefore we kowtow to Sacramento, and to the Board of Regents, and to the party press, or to the press of both parties.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5112">&#34;Yes, that&#39;s clear; but how about you?&#34; Martin urged. </span>
      <span id="f5113"> &#34;You must be a fish out of the water.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5114">&#34;Few like me, I imagine, in the university pond. </span>
      <span id="f5115"> Sometimes I am fairly sure I am out of water, and that I should belong in Paris, in Grub Street, in a hermit&#39;s cave, or in some sadly wild Bohemian crowd, drinking claret,--dago-red they call it in San Francisco,--dining in cheap restaurants in the Latin Quarter, and expressing vociferously radical views upon all creation. </span>
      <span id="f5116"> Really, I am frequently almost sure that I was cut out to be a radical. </span>
      <span id="f5117"> But then, there are so many questions on which I am not sure. </span>
      <span id="f5118"> I grow timid when I am face to face with my human frailty, which ever prevents me from grasping all the factors in any problem--human, vital problems, you know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5119">And as he talked on, Martin became aware that to his own lips had come the &#34;Song of the Trade Wind&#34;:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5120">&#34;I am strongest at noon,    But under the moon    I stiffen the bunt of the sail.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5121">He was almost humming the words, and it dawned upon him that the other reminded him of the trade wind, of the Northeast Trade, steady, and cool, and strong. </span>
      <span id="f5122"> He was equable, he was to be relied upon, and withal there was a certain bafflement about him. </span>
      <span id="f5123"> Martin had the feeling that he never spoke his full mind, just as he had often had the feeling that the trades never blew their strongest but always held reserves of strength that were never used. </span>
      <span id="f5124"> Martin&#39;s trick of visioning was active as ever. </span>
      <span id="f5125"> His brain was a most accessible storehouse of remembered fact and fancy, and its contents seemed ever ordered and spread for his inspection. </span>
      <span id="f5126"> Whatever occurred in the instant present, Martin&#39;s mind immediately presented associated antithesis or similitude which ordinarily expressed themselves to him in vision. </span>
      <span id="f5127"> It was sheerly automatic, and his visioning was an unfailing accompaniment to the living present. </span>
      <span id="f5128"> Just as Ruth&#39;s face, in a momentary jealousy had called before his eyes a forgotten moonlight gale, and as Professor Caldwell made him see again the Northeast Trade herding the white billows across the purple sea, so, from moment to moment, not disconcerting but rather identifying and classifying, new memory-visions rose before him, or spread under his eyelids, or were thrown upon the screen of his consciousness. </span>
      <span id="f5129"> These visions came out of the actions and sensations of the past, out of things and events and books of yesterday and last week--a countless host of apparitions that, waking or sleeping, forever thronged his mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5130">So it was, as he listened to Professor Caldwell&#39;s easy flow of speech--the conversation of a clever, cultured man--that Martin kept seeing himself down all his past. </span>
      <span id="f5131"> He saw himself when he had been quite the hoodlum, wearing a &#34;stiff-rim&#34; Stetson hat and a square-cut, double-breasted coat, with a certain swagger to the shoulders and possessing the ideal of being as tough as the police permitted. </span>
      <span id="f5132"> He did not disguise it to himself, nor attempt to palliate it. </span>
      <span id="f5133"> At one time in his life he had been just a common hoodlum, the leader of a gang that worried the police and terrorized honest, working-class householders. </span>
      <span id="f5134"> But his ideals had changed. </span>
      <span id="f5135"> He glanced about him at the well-bred, well-dressed men and women, and breathed into his lungs the atmosphere of culture and refinement, and at the same moment the ghost of his early youth, in stiff- rim and square-cut, with swagger and toughness, stalked across the room. </span>
      <span id="f5136">This figure, of the corner hoodlum, he saw merge into himself, sitting and talking with an actual university professor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5137">For, after all, he had never found his permanent abiding place. </span>
      <span id="f5138"> He had fitted in wherever he found himself, been a favorite always and everywhere by virtue of holding his own at work and at play and by his willingness and ability to fight for his rights and command respect. </span>
      <span id="f5139"> But he had never taken root. </span>
      <span id="f5140"> He had fitted in sufficiently to satisfy his fellows but not to satisfy himself. </span>
      <span id="f5141"> He had been perturbed always by a feeling of unrest, had heard always the call of something from beyond, and had wandered on through life seeking it until he found books and art and love. </span>
      <span id="f5142"> And here he was, in the midst of all this, the only one of all the comrades he had adventured with who could have made themselves eligible for the inside of the Morse home.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5143">But such thoughts and visions did not prevent him from following Professor Caldwell closely. </span>
      <span id="f5144"> And as he followed, comprehendingly and critically, he noted the unbroken field of the other&#39;s knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f5145"> As for himself, from moment to moment the conversation showed him gaps and open stretches, whole subjects with which he was unfamiliar. </span>
      <span id="f5146"> Nevertheless, thanks to his Spencer, he saw that he possessed the outlines of the field of knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f5147"> It was a matter only of time, when he would fill in the outline. </span>
      <span id="f5148"> Then watch out, he thought--&#39;ware shoal, everybody! </span>
      <span id="f5149"> He felt like sitting at the feet of the professor, worshipful and absorbent; but, as he listened, he began to discern a weakness in the other&#39;s judgments--a weakness so stray and elusive that he might not have caught it had it not been ever present. </span>
      <span id="f5150"> And when he did catch it, he leapt to equality at once.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5151">Ruth came up to them a second time, just as Martin began to speak.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5152">&#34;I&#39;ll tell you where you are wrong, or, rather, what weakens your judgments,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f5153"> &#34;You lack biology. </span>
      <span id="f5154"> It has no place in your scheme of things.--Oh, I mean the real interpretative biology, from the ground up, from the laboratory and the test-tube and the vitalized inorganic right on up to the widest aesthetic and sociological generalizations.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5155">Ruth was appalled. </span>
      <span id="f5156"> She had sat two lecture courses under Professor Caldwell and looked up to him as the living repository of all knowledge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5157">&#34;I scarcely follow you,&#34; he said dubiously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5158">Martin was not so sure but what he had followed him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5159">&#34;Then I&#39;ll try to explain,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f5160"> &#34;I remember reading in Egyptian history something to the effect that understanding could not be had of Egyptian art without first studying the land question.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5161">&#34;Quite right,&#34; the professor nodded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5162">&#34;And it seems to me,&#34; Martin continued, &#34;that knowledge of the land question, in turn, of all questions, for that matter, cannot be had without previous knowledge of the stuff and the constitution of life. </span>
      <span id="f5163"> How can we understand laws and institutions, religions and customs, without understanding, not merely the nature of the creatures that made them, but the nature of the stuff out of which the creatures are made? </span>
      <span id="f5164"> Is literature less human than the architecture and sculpture of Egypt? </span>
      <span id="f5165"> Is there one thing in the known universe that is not subject to the law of evolution?--Oh, I know there is an elaborate evolution of the various arts laid down, but it seems to me to be too mechanical. </span>
      <span id="f5166"> The human himself is left out. </span>
      <span id="f5167"> The evolution of the tool, of the harp, of music and song and dance, are all beautifully elaborated; but how about the evolution of the human himself, the development of the basic and intrinsic parts that were in him before he made his first tool or gibbered his first chant? </span>
      <span id="f5168"> It is that which you do not consider, and which I call biology. </span>
      <span id="f5169"> It is biology in its largest aspects.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5170">&#34;I know I express myself incoherently, but I&#39;ve tried to hammer out the idea. </span>
      <span id="f5171"> It came to me as you were talking, so I was not primed and ready to deliver it. </span>
      <span id="f5172"> You spoke yourself of the human frailty that prevented one from taking all the factors into consideration. </span>
      <span id="f5173"> And you, in turn,--or so it seems to me,--leave out the biological factor, the very stuff out of which has been spun the fabric of all the arts, the warp and the woof of all human actions and achievements.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5174">To Ruth&#39;s amazement, Martin was not immediately crushed, and that the professor replied in the way he did struck her as forbearance for Martin&#39;s youth. </span>
      <span id="f5175"> Professor Caldwell sat for a full minute, silent and fingering his watch chain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5176">&#34;Do you know,&#34; he said at last, &#34;I&#39;ve had that same criticism passed on me once before--by a very great man, a scientist and evolutionist, Joseph Le Conte. </span>
      <span id="f5177"> But he is dead, and I thought to remain undetected; and now you come along and expose me. </span>
      <span id="f5178"> Seriously, though--and this is confession--I think there is something in your contention--a great deal, in fact. </span>
      <span id="f5179"> I am too classical, not enough up-to-date in the interpretative branches of science, and I can only plead the disadvantages of my education and a temperamental slothfulness that prevents me from doing the work. </span>
      <span id="f5180"> I wonder if you&#39;ll believe that I&#39;ve never been inside a physics or chemistry laboratory? </span>
      <span id="f5181"> It is true, nevertheless. </span>
      <span id="f5182"> Le Conte was right, and so are you, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5183">Eden, at least to an extent--how much I do not know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5184">Ruth drew Martin away with her on a pretext; when she had got him aside, whispering:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5185">&#34;You shouldn&#39;t have monopolized Professor Caldwell that way. </span>
      <span id="f5186"> There may be others who want to talk with him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5187">&#34;My mistake,&#34; Martin admitted contritely. </span>
      <span id="f5188"> &#34;But I&#39;d got him stirred up, and he was so interesting that I did not think. </span>
      <span id="f5189"> Do you know, he is the brightest, the most intellectual, man I have ever talked with. </span>
      <span id="f5190"> And I&#39;ll tell you something else. </span>
      <span id="f5191"> I once thought that everybody who went to universities, or who sat in the high places in society, was just as brilliant and intelligent as he.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5192">&#34;He&#39;s an exception,&#34; she answered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5193">&#34;I should say so. </span>
      <span id="f5194"> Whom do you want me to talk to now?--Oh, say, bring me up against that cashier-fellow.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5195">Martin talked for fifteen minutes with him, nor could Ruth have wished better behavior on her lover&#39;s part. </span>
      <span id="f5196"> Not once did his eyes flash nor his cheeks flush, while the calmness and poise with which he talked surprised her. </span>
      <span id="f5197"> But in Martin&#39;s estimation the whole tribe of bank cashiers fell a few hundred per cent, and for the rest of the evening he labored under the impression that bank cashiers and talkers of platitudes were synonymous phrases. </span>
      <span id="f5198"> The army officer he found good-natured and simple, a healthy, wholesome young fellow, content to occupy the place in life into which birth and luck had flung him. </span>
      <span id="f5199"> On learning that he had completed two years in the university, Martin was puzzled to know where he had stored it away. </span>
      <span id="f5200"> Nevertheless Martin liked him better than the platitudinous bank cashier.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5201">&#34;I really don&#39;t object to platitudes,&#34; he told Ruth later; &#34;but what worries me into nervousness is the pompous, smugly complacent, superior certitude with which they are uttered and the time taken to do it. </span>
      <span id="f5202"> Why, I could give that man the whole history of the Reformation in the time he took to tell me that the Union-Labor Party had fused with the Democrats. </span>
      <span id="f5203">Do you know, he skins his words as a professional poker-player skins the cards that are dealt out to him. </span>
      <span id="f5204"> Some day I&#39;ll show you what I mean.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5205">&#34;I&#39;m sorry you don&#39;t like him,&#34; was her reply. </span>
      <span id="f5206"> &#34;He&#39;s a favorite of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5207">Butler&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f5208"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5209">Butler says he is safe and honest--calls him the Rock, Peter, and says that upon him any banking institution can well be built.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5210">&#34;I don&#39;t doubt it--from the little I saw of him and the less I heard from him; but I don&#39;t think so much of banks as I did. </span>
      <span id="f5211"> You don&#39;t mind my speaking my mind this way, dear?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5212">&#34;No, no; it is most interesting.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5213">&#34;Yes,&#34; Martin went on heartily, &#34;I&#39;m no more than a barbarian getting my first impressions of civilization. </span>
      <span id="f5214"> Such impressions must be entertainingly novel to the civilized person.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5215">&#34;What did you think of my cousins?&#34; Ruth queried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5216">&#34;I liked them better than the other women. </span>
      <span id="f5217"> There&#39;s plenty of fun in them along with paucity of pretence.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5218">&#34;Then you did like the other women?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5219">He shook his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5220">&#34;That social-settlement woman is no more than a sociological poll-parrot. </span>
      <span id="f5221">I swear, if you winnowed her out between the stars, like Tomlinson, there would be found in her not one original thought. </span>
      <span id="f5222"> As for the portrait-painter, she was a positive bore. </span>
      <span id="f5223"> She&#39;d make a good wife for the cashier. </span>
      <span id="f5224"> And the musician woman! </span>
      <span id="f5225"> I don&#39;t care how nimble her fingers are, how perfect her technique, how wonderful her expression--the fact is, she knows nothing about music.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5226">&#34;She plays beautifully,&#34; Ruth protested.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5227">&#34;Yes, she&#39;s undoubtedly gymnastic in the externals of music, but the intrinsic spirit of music is unguessed by her. </span>
      <span id="f5228"> I asked her what music meant to her--you know I&#39;m always curious to know that particular thing; and she did not know what it meant to her, except that she adored it, that it was the greatest of the arts, and that it meant more than life to her.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5229">&#34;You were making them talk shop,&#34; Ruth charged him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5230">&#34;I confess it. </span>
      <span id="f5231"> And if they were failures on shop, imagine my sufferings if they had discoursed on other subjects. </span>
      <span id="f5232"> Why, I used to think that up here, where all the advantages of culture were enjoyed--&#34;  He paused for a moment, and watched the youthful shade of himself, in stiff-rim and square-cut, enter the door and swagger across the room. </span>
      <span id="f5233"> &#34;As I was saying, up here I thought all men and women were brilliant and radiant. </span>
      <span id="f5234">But now, from what little I&#39;ve seen of them, they strike me as a pack of ninnies, most of them, and ninety percent of the remainder as bores. </span>
      <span id="f5235"> Now there&#39;s Professor Caldwell--he&#39;s different. </span>
      <span id="f5236"> He&#39;s a man, every inch of him and every atom of his gray matter.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5237">Ruth&#39;s face brightened.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5238">&#34;Tell me about him,&#34; she urged. </span>
      <span id="f5239"> &#34;Not what is large and brilliant--I know those qualities; but whatever you feel is adverse. </span>
      <span id="f5240"> I am most curious to know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5241">&#34;Perhaps I&#39;ll get myself in a pickle.&#34;  Martin debated humorously for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f5242"> &#34;Suppose you tell me first. </span>
      <span id="f5243"> Or maybe you find in him nothing less than the best.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5244">&#34;I attended two lecture courses under him, and I have known him for two years; that is why I am anxious for your first impression.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5245">&#34;Bad impression, you mean? </span>
      <span id="f5246"> Well, here goes. </span>
      <span id="f5247"> He is all the fine things you think about him, I guess. </span>
      <span id="f5248"> At least, he is the finest specimen of intellectual man I have met; but he is a man with a secret shame.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5249">&#34;Oh, no, no!&#34; he hastened to cry. </span>
      <span id="f5250"> &#34;Nothing paltry nor vulgar. </span>
      <span id="f5251"> What I mean is that he strikes me as a man who has gone to the bottom of things, and is so afraid of what he saw that he makes believe to himself that he never saw it. </span>
      <span id="f5252"> Perhaps that&#39;s not the clearest way to express it. </span>
      <span id="f5253"> Here&#39;s another way. </span>
      <span id="f5254"> A man who has found the path to the hidden temple but has not followed it; who has, perhaps, caught glimpses of the temple and striven afterward to convince himself that it was only a mirage of foliage. </span>
      <span id="f5255"> Yet another way. </span>
      <span id="f5256"> A man who could have done things but who placed no value on the doing, and who, all the time, in his innermost heart, is regretting that he has not done them; who has secretly laughed at the rewards for doing, and yet, still more secretly, has yearned for the rewards and for the joy of doing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5257">&#34;I don&#39;t read him that way,&#34; she said. </span>
      <span id="f5258"> &#34;And for that matter, I don&#39;t see just what you mean.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5259">&#34;It is only a vague feeling on my part,&#34; Martin temporized. </span>
      <span id="f5260"> &#34;I have no reason for it. </span>
      <span id="f5261"> It is only a feeling, and most likely it is wrong. </span>
      <span id="f5262"> You certainly should know him better than I.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5263">From the evening at Ruth&#39;s Martin brought away with him strange confusions and conflicting feelings. </span>
      <span id="f5264"> He was disappointed in his goal, in the persons he had climbed to be with. </span>
      <span id="f5265"> On the other hand, he was encouraged with his success. </span>
      <span id="f5266"> The climb had been easier than he expected. </span>
      <span id="f5267">He was superior to the climb, and (he did not, with false modesty, hide it from himself) he was superior to the beings among whom he had climbed--with the exception, of course, of Professor Caldwell. </span>
      <span id="f5268"> About life and the books he knew more than they, and he wondered into what nooks and crannies they had cast aside their educations. </span>
      <span id="f5269"> He did not know that he was himself possessed of unusual brain vigor; nor did he know that the persons who were given to probing the depths and to thinking ultimate thoughts were not to be found in the drawing rooms of the world&#39;s Morses; nor did he dream that such persons were as lonely eagles sailing solitary in the azure sky far above the earth and its swarming freight of gregarious life.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>