<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XXVIII</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f5270">CHAPTER XXVIII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f5271">But success had lost Martin&#39;s address, and her messengers no longer came to his door. </span>
      <span id="f5272"> For twenty-five days, working Sundays and holidays, he toiled on &#34;The Shame of the Sun,&#34; a long essay of some thirty thousand words. </span>
      <span id="f5273"> It was a deliberate attack on the mysticism of the Maeterlinck school--an attack from the citadel of positive science upon the wonder- dreamers, but an attack nevertheless that retained much of beauty and wonder of the sort compatible with ascertained fact. </span>
      <span id="f5274"> It was a little later that he followed up the attack with two short essays, &#34;The Wonder- Dreamers&#34; and &#34;The Yardstick of the Ego.&#34;  And on essays, long and short, he began to pay the travelling expenses from magazine to magazine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5275">During the twenty-five days spent on &#34;The Shame of the Sun,&#34; he sold hack- work to the extent of six dollars and fifty cents. </span>
      <span id="f5276"> A joke had brought in fifty cents, and a second one, sold to a high-grade comic weekly, had fetched a dollar. </span>
      <span id="f5277"> Then two humorous poems had earned two dollars and three dollars respectively. </span>
      <span id="f5278"> As a result, having exhausted his credit with the tradesmen (though he had increased his credit with the grocer to five dollars), his wheel and suit of clothes went back to the pawnbroker. </span>
      <span id="f5279">The type-writer people were again clamoring for money, insistently pointing out that according to the agreement rent was to be paid strictly in advance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5280">Encouraged by his several small sales, Martin went back to hack-work. </span>
      <span id="f5281">Perhaps there was a living in it, after all. </span>
      <span id="f5282"> Stored away under his table were the twenty storiettes which had been rejected by the newspaper short- story syndicate. </span>
      <span id="f5283"> He read them over in order to find out how not to write newspaper storiettes, and so doing, reasoned out the perfect formula. </span>
      <span id="f5284"> He found that the newspaper storiette should never be tragic, should never end unhappily, and should never contain beauty of language, subtlety of thought, nor real delicacy of sentiment. </span>
      <span id="f5285"> Sentiment it must contain, plenty of it, pure and noble, of the sort that in his own early youth had brought his applause from &#34;nigger heaven&#34;--the &#34;For-God-my-country-and- the-Czar&#34; and &#34;I-may-be-poor-but-I-am-honest&#34; brand of sentiment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5286">Having learned such precautions, Martin consulted &#34;The Duchess&#34; for tone, and proceeded to mix according to formula. </span>
      <span id="f5287"> The formula consists of three parts: (1) a pair of lovers are jarred apart; (2) by some deed or event they are reunited; (3) marriage bells. </span>
      <span id="f5288"> The third part was an unvarying quantity, but the first and second parts could be varied an infinite number of times. </span>
      <span id="f5289"> Thus, the pair of lovers could be jarred apart by misunderstood motives, by accident of fate, by jealous rivals, by irate parents, by crafty guardians, by scheming relatives, and so forth and so forth; they could be reunited by a brave deed of the man lover, by a similar deed of the woman lover, by change of heart in one lover or the other, by forced confession of crafty guardian, scheming relative, or jealous rival, by voluntary confession of same, by discovery of some unguessed secret, by lover storming girl&#39;s heart, by lover making long and noble self-sacrifice, and so on, endlessly. </span>
      <span id="f5290"> It was very fetching to make the girl propose in the course of being reunited, and Martin discovered, bit by bit, other decidedly piquant and fetching ruses. </span>
      <span id="f5291"> But marriage bells at the end was the one thing he could take no liberties with; though the heavens rolled up as a scroll and the stars fell, the wedding bells must go on ringing just the same. </span>
      <span id="f5292"> In quantity, the formula prescribed twelve hundred words minimum dose, fifteen hundred words maximum dose.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5293">Before he got very far along in the art of the storiette, Martin worked out half a dozen stock forms, which he always consulted when constructing storiettes. </span>
      <span id="f5294"> These forms were like the cunning tables used by mathematicians, which may be entered from top, bottom, right, and left, which entrances consist of scores of lines and dozens of columns, and from which may be drawn, without reasoning or thinking, thousands of different conclusions, all unchallengably precise and true. </span>
      <span id="f5295"> Thus, in the course of half an hour with his forms, Martin could frame up a dozen or so storiettes, which he put aside and filled in at his convenience. </span>
      <span id="f5296"> He found that he could fill one in, after a day of serious work, in the hour before going to bed. </span>
      <span id="f5297"> As he later confessed to Ruth, he could almost do it in his sleep. </span>
      <span id="f5298"> The real work was in constructing the frames, and that was merely mechanical.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5299">He had no doubt whatever of the efficacy of his formula, and for once he knew the editorial mind when he said positively to himself that the first two he sent off would bring checks. </span>
      <span id="f5300"> And checks they brought, for four dollars each, at the end of twelve days.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5301">In the meantime he was making fresh and alarming discoveries concerning the magazines. </span>
      <span id="f5302"> Though the Transcontinental had published &#34;The Ring of Bells,&#34; no check was forthcoming. </span>
      <span id="f5303"> Martin needed it, and he wrote for it. </span>
      <span id="f5304">An evasive answer and a request for more of his work was all he received. </span>
      <span id="f5305">He had gone hungry two days waiting for the reply, and it was then that he put his wheel back in pawn. </span>
      <span id="f5306"> He wrote regularly, twice a week, to the Transcontinental for his five dollars, though it was only semi-occasionally that he elicited a reply. </span>
      <span id="f5307"> He did not know that the Transcontinental had been staggering along precariously for years, that it was a fourth-rater, or tenth-rater, without standing, with a crazy circulation that partly rested on petty bullying and partly on patriotic appealing, and with advertisements that were scarcely more than charitable donations. </span>
      <span id="f5308"> Nor did he know that the Transcontinental was the sole livelihood of the editor and the business manager, and that they could wring their livelihood out of it only by moving to escape paying rent and by never paying any bill they could evade. </span>
      <span id="f5309"> Nor could he have guessed that the particular five dollars that belonged to him had been appropriated by the business manager for the painting of his house in Alameda, which painting he performed himself, on week-day afternoons, because he could not afford to pay union wages and because the first scab he had employed had had a ladder jerked out from under him and been sent to the hospital with a broken collar-bone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5310">The ten dollars for which Martin had sold &#34;Treasure Hunters&#34; to the Chicago newspaper did not come to hand. </span>
      <span id="f5311"> The article had been published, as he had ascertained at the file in the Central Reading-room, but no word could he get from the editor. </span>
      <span id="f5312"> His letters were ignored. </span>
      <span id="f5313"> To satisfy himself that they had been received, he registered several of them. </span>
      <span id="f5314"> It was nothing less than robbery, he concluded--a cold-blooded steal; while he starved, he was pilfered of his merchandise, of his goods, the sale of which was the sole way of getting bread to eat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5315">Youth and Age was a weekly, and it had published two-thirds of his twenty- one-thousand-word serial when it went out of business. </span>
      <span id="f5316"> With it went all hopes of getting his sixteen dollars.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5317">To cap the situation, &#34;The Pot,&#34; which he looked upon as one of the best things he had written, was lost to him. </span>
      <span id="f5318"> In despair, casting about frantically among the magazines, he had sent it to The Billow, a society weekly in San Francisco. </span>
      <span id="f5319"> His chief reason for submitting it to that publication was that, having only to travel across the bay from Oakland, a quick decision could be reached. </span>
      <span id="f5320"> Two weeks later he was overjoyed to see, in the latest number on the news-stand, his story printed in full, illustrated, and in the place of honor. </span>
      <span id="f5321"> He went home with leaping pulse, wondering how much they would pay him for one of the best things he had done. </span>
      <span id="f5322"> Also, the celerity with which it had been accepted and published was a pleasant thought to him. </span>
      <span id="f5323"> That the editor had not informed him of the acceptance made the surprise more complete. </span>
      <span id="f5324"> After waiting a week, two weeks, and half a week longer, desperation conquered diffidence, and he wrote to the editor of The Billow, suggesting that possibly through some negligence of the business manager his little account had been overlooked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5325">Even if it isn&#39;t more than five dollars, Martin thought to himself, it will buy enough beans and pea-soup to enable me to write half a dozen like it, and possibly as good.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5326">Back came a cool letter from the editor that at least elicited Martin&#39;s admiration.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5327">&#34;We thank you,&#34; it ran, &#34;for your excellent contribution. </span>
      <span id="f5328"> All of us in the office enjoyed it immensely, and, as you see, it was given the place of honor and immediate publication. </span>
      <span id="f5329"> We earnestly hope that you liked the illustrations.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5330">&#34;On rereading your letter it seems to us that you are laboring under the misapprehension that we pay for unsolicited manuscripts. </span>
      <span id="f5331"> This is not our custom, and of course yours was unsolicited. </span>
      <span id="f5332"> We assumed, naturally, when we received your story, that you understood the situation. </span>
      <span id="f5333"> We can only deeply regret this unfortunate misunderstanding, and assure you of our unfailing regard. </span>
      <span id="f5334"> Again, thanking you for your kind contribution, and hoping to receive more from you in the near future, we remain, etc.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5335">There was also a postscript to the effect that though The Billow carried no free-list, it took great pleasure in sending him a complimentary subscription for the ensuing year.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5336">After that experience, Martin typed at the top of the first sheet of all his manuscripts: &#34;Submitted at your usual rate.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5337">Some day, he consoled himself, they will be submitted at _my_ usual rate.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5338">He discovered in himself, at this period, a passion for perfection, under the sway of which he rewrote and polished &#34;The Jostling Street,&#34; &#34;The Wine of Life,&#34; &#34;Joy,&#34; the &#34;Sea Lyrics,&#34; and others of his earlier work. </span>
      <span id="f5339">As of old, nineteen hours of labor a day was all too little to suit him. </span>
      <span id="f5340">He wrote prodigiously, and he read prodigiously, forgetting in his toil the pangs caused by giving up his tobacco. </span>
      <span id="f5341"> Ruth&#39;s promised cure for the habit, flamboyantly labelled, he stowed away in the most inaccessible corner of his bureau. </span>
      <span id="f5342"> Especially during his stretches of famine he suffered from lack of the weed; but no matter how often he mastered the craving, it remained with him as strong as ever. </span>
      <span id="f5343"> He regarded it as the biggest thing he had ever achieved. </span>
      <span id="f5344"> Ruth&#39;s point of view was that he was doing no more than was right. </span>
      <span id="f5345"> She brought him the anti-tobacco remedy, purchased out of her glove money, and in a few days forgot all about it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5346">His machine-made storiettes, though he hated them and derided them, were successful. </span>
      <span id="f5347"> By means of them he redeemed all his pledges, paid most of his bills, and bought a new set of tires for his wheel. </span>
      <span id="f5348"> The storiettes at least kept the pot a-boiling and gave him time for ambitious work; while the one thing that upheld him was the forty dollars he had received from The White Mouse. </span>
      <span id="f5349"> He anchored his faith to that, and was confident that the really first-class magazines would pay an unknown writer at least an equal rate, if not a better one. </span>
      <span id="f5350"> But the thing was, how to get into the first-class magazines. </span>
      <span id="f5351"> His best stories, essays, and poems went begging among them, and yet, each month, he read reams of dull, prosy, inartistic stuff between all their various covers. </span>
      <span id="f5352"> If only one editor, he sometimes thought, would descend from his high seat of pride to write me one cheering line! </span>
      <span id="f5353"> No matter if my work is unusual, no matter if it is unfit, for prudential reasons, for their pages, surely there must be some sparks in it, somewhere, a few, to warm them to some sort of appreciation. </span>
      <span id="f5354"> And thereupon he would get out one or another of his manuscripts, such as &#34;Adventure,&#34; and read it over and over in a vain attempt to vindicate the editorial silence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5355">As the sweet California spring came on, his period of plenty came to an end. </span>
      <span id="f5356"> For several weeks he had been worried by a strange silence on the part of the newspaper storiette syndicate. </span>
      <span id="f5357"> Then, one day, came back to him through the mail ten of his immaculate machine-made storiettes. </span>
      <span id="f5358"> They were accompanied by a brief letter to the effect that the syndicate was overstocked, and that some months would elapse before it would be in the market again for manuscripts. </span>
      <span id="f5359"> Martin had even been extravagant on the strength of those ten storiettes. </span>
      <span id="f5360"> Toward the last the syndicate had been paying him five dollars each for them and accepting every one he sent. </span>
      <span id="f5361"> So he had looked upon the ten as good as sold, and he had lived accordingly, on a basis of fifty dollars in the bank. </span>
      <span id="f5362"> So it was that he entered abruptly upon a lean period, wherein he continued selling his earlier efforts to publications that would not pay and submitting his later work to magazines that would not buy. </span>
      <span id="f5363"> Also, he resumed his trips to the pawn-broker down in Oakland. </span>
      <span id="f5364"> A few jokes and snatches of humorous verse, sold to the New York weeklies, made existence barely possible for him. </span>
      <span id="f5365"> It was at this time that he wrote letters of inquiry to the several great monthly and quarterly reviews, and learned in reply that they rarely considered unsolicited articles, and that most of their contents were written upon order by well-known specialists who were authorities in their various fields.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>