<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XXIX</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f5366">CHAPTER XXIX</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f5367">It was a hard summer for Martin. </span>
      <span id="f5368"> Manuscript readers and editors were away on vacation, and publications that ordinarily returned a decision in three weeks now retained his manuscript for three months or more. </span>
      <span id="f5369"> The consolation he drew from it was that a saving in postage was effected by the deadlock. </span>
      <span id="f5370"> Only the robber-publications seemed to remain actively in business, and to them Martin disposed of all his early efforts, such as &#34;Pearl-diving,&#34; &#34;The Sea as a Career,&#34; &#34;Turtle-catching,&#34; and &#34;The Northeast Trades.&#34;  For these manuscripts he never received a penny. </span>
      <span id="f5371"> It is true, after six months&#39; correspondence, he effected a compromise, whereby he received a safety razor for &#34;Turtle-catching,&#34; and that The Acropolis, having agreed to give him five dollars cash and five yearly subscriptions: for &#34;The Northeast Trades,&#34; fulfilled the second part of the agreement.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5372">For a sonnet on Stevenson he managed to wring two dollars out of a Boston editor who was running a magazine with a Matthew Arnold taste and a penny- dreadful purse. </span>
      <span id="f5373"> &#34;The Peri and the Pearl,&#34; a clever skit of a poem of two hundred lines, just finished, white hot from his brain, won the heart of the editor of a San Francisco magazine published in the interest of a great railroad. </span>
      <span id="f5374"> When the editor wrote, offering him payment in transportation, Martin wrote back to inquire if the transportation was transferable. </span>
      <span id="f5375"> It was not, and so, being prevented from peddling it, he asked for the return of the poem. </span>
      <span id="f5376"> Back it came, with the editor&#39;s regrets, and Martin sent it to San Francisco again, this time to The Hornet, a pretentious monthly that had been fanned into a constellation of the first magnitude by the brilliant journalist who founded it. </span>
      <span id="f5377"> But The Hornet&#39;s light had begun to dim long before Martin was born. </span>
      <span id="f5378"> The editor promised Martin fifteen dollars for the poem, but, when it was published, seemed to forget about it. </span>
      <span id="f5379"> Several of his letters being ignored, Martin indicted an angry one which drew a reply. </span>
      <span id="f5380"> It was written by a new editor, who coolly informed Martin that he declined to be held responsible for the old editor&#39;s mistakes, and that he did not think much of &#34;The Peri and the Pearl&#34; anyway.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5381">But The Globe, a Chicago magazine, gave Martin the most cruel treatment of all. </span>
      <span id="f5382"> He had refrained from offering his &#34;Sea Lyrics&#34; for publication, until driven to it by starvation. </span>
      <span id="f5383"> After having been rejected by a dozen magazines, they had come to rest in The Globe office. </span>
      <span id="f5384"> There were thirty poems in the collection, and he was to receive a dollar apiece for them. </span>
      <span id="f5385">The first month four were published, and he promptly received a cheek for four dollars; but when he looked over the magazine, he was appalled at the slaughter. </span>
      <span id="f5386"> In some cases the titles had been altered: &#34;Finis,&#34; for instance, being changed to &#34;The Finish,&#34; and &#34;The Song of the Outer Reef&#34; to &#34;The Song of the Coral Reef.&#34;  In one case, an absolutely different title, a misappropriate title, was substituted. </span>
      <span id="f5387"> In place of his own, &#34;Medusa Lights,&#34; the editor had printed, &#34;The Backward Track.&#34;  But the slaughter in the body of the poems was terrifying. </span>
      <span id="f5388"> Martin groaned and sweated and thrust his hands through his hair. </span>
      <span id="f5389"> Phrases, lines, and stanzas were cut out, interchanged, or juggled about in the most incomprehensible manner. </span>
      <span id="f5390"> Sometimes lines and stanzas not his own were substituted for his. </span>
      <span id="f5391"> He could not believe that a sane editor could be guilty of such maltreatment, and his favorite hypothesis was that his poems must have been doctored by the office boy or the stenographer. </span>
      <span id="f5392">Martin wrote immediately, begging the editor to cease publishing the lyrics and to return them to him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5393">He wrote again and again, begging, entreating, threatening, but his letters were ignored. </span>
      <span id="f5394"> Month by month the slaughter went on till the thirty poems were published, and month by month he received a check for those which had appeared in the current number.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5395">Despite these various misadventures, the memory of the White Mouse forty- dollar check sustained him, though he was driven more and more to hack- work. </span>
      <span id="f5396"> He discovered a bread-and-butter field in the agricultural weeklies and trade journals, though among the religious weeklies he found he could easily starve. </span>
      <span id="f5397"> At his lowest ebb, when his black suit was in pawn, he made a ten-strike--or so it seemed to him--in a prize contest arranged by the County Committee of the Republican Party. </span>
      <span id="f5398"> There were three branches of the contest, and he entered them all, laughing at himself bitterly the while in that he was driven to such straits to live. </span>
      <span id="f5399">His poem won the first prize of ten dollars, his campaign song the second prize of five dollars, his essay on the principles of the Republican Party the first prize of twenty-five dollars. </span>
      <span id="f5400"> Which was very gratifying to him until he tried to collect. </span>
      <span id="f5401"> Something had gone wrong in the County Committee, and, though a rich banker and a state senator were members of it, the money was not forthcoming. </span>
      <span id="f5402"> While this affair was hanging fire, he proved that he understood the principles of the Democratic Party by winning the first prize for his essay in a similar contest. </span>
      <span id="f5403"> And, moreover, he received the money, twenty-five dollars. </span>
      <span id="f5404"> But the forty dollars won in the first contest he never received.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5405">Driven to shifts in order to see Ruth, and deciding that the long walk from north Oakland to her house and back again consumed too much time, he kept his black suit in pawn in place of his bicycle. </span>
      <span id="f5406"> The latter gave him exercise, saved him hours of time for work, and enabled him to see Ruth just the same. </span>
      <span id="f5407"> A pair of knee duck trousers and an old sweater made him a presentable wheel costume, so that he could go with Ruth on afternoon rides. </span>
      <span id="f5408"> Besides, he no longer had opportunity to see much of her in her own home, where Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f5409">Morse was thoroughly prosecuting her campaign of entertainment. </span>
      <span id="f5410"> The exalted beings he met there, and to whom he had looked up but a short time before, now bored him. </span>
      <span id="f5411"> They were no longer exalted. </span>
      <span id="f5412"> He was nervous and irritable, what of his hard times, disappointments, and close application to work, and the conversation of such people was maddening. </span>
      <span id="f5413"> He was not unduly egotistic. </span>
      <span id="f5414"> He measured the narrowness of their minds by the minds of the thinkers in the books he read. </span>
      <span id="f5415"> At Ruth&#39;s home he never met a large mind, with the exception of Professor Caldwell, and Caldwell he had met there only once. </span>
      <span id="f5416"> As for the rest, they were numskulls, ninnies, superficial, dogmatic, and ignorant. </span>
      <span id="f5417">It was their ignorance that astounded him. </span>
      <span id="f5418"> What was the matter with them? </span>
      <span id="f5419"> What had they done with their educations? </span>
      <span id="f5420"> They had had access to the same books he had. </span>
      <span id="f5421"> How did it happen that they had drawn nothing from them?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5422">He knew that the great minds, the deep and rational thinkers, existed. </span>
      <span id="f5423"> He had his proofs from the books, the books that had educated him beyond the Morse standard. </span>
      <span id="f5424"> And he knew that higher intellects than those of the Morse circle were to be found in the world. </span>
      <span id="f5425"> He read English society novels, wherein he caught glimpses of men and women talking politics and philosophy. </span>
      <span id="f5426"> And he read of salons in great cities, even in the United States, where art and intellect congregated. </span>
      <span id="f5427"> Foolishly, in the past, he had conceived that all well-groomed persons above the working class were persons with power of intellect and vigor of beauty. </span>
      <span id="f5428"> Culture and collars had gone together, to him, and he had been deceived into believing that college educations and mastery were the same things.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5429">Well, he would fight his way on and up higher. </span>
      <span id="f5430"> And he would take Ruth with him. </span>
      <span id="f5431"> Her he dearly loved, and he was confident that she would shine anywhere. </span>
      <span id="f5432"> As it was clear to him that he had been handicapped by his early environment, so now he perceived that she was similarly handicapped. </span>
      <span id="f5433"> She had not had a chance to expand. </span>
      <span id="f5434"> The books on her father&#39;s shelves, the paintings on the walls, the music on the piano--all was just so much meretricious display. </span>
      <span id="f5435"> To real literature, real painting, real music, the Morses and their kind, were dead. </span>
      <span id="f5436"> And bigger than such things was life, of which they were densely, hopelessly ignorant. </span>
      <span id="f5437"> In spite of their Unitarian proclivities and their masks of conservative broadmindedness, they were two generations behind interpretative science: their mental processes were mediaeval, while their thinking on the ultimate data of existence and of the universe struck him as the same metaphysical method that was as young as the youngest race, as old as the cave-man, and older--the same that moved the first Pleistocene ape-man to fear the dark; that moved the first hasty Hebrew savage to incarnate Eve from Adam&#39;s rib; that moved Descartes to build an idealistic system of the universe out of the projections of his own puny ego; and that moved the famous British ecclesiastic to denounce evolution in satire so scathing as to win immediate applause and leave his name a notorious scrawl on the page of history.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5438">So Martin thought, and he thought further, till it dawned upon him that the difference between these lawyers, officers, business men, and bank cashiers he had met and the members of the working class he had known was on a par with the difference in the food they ate, clothes they wore, neighborhoods in which they lived. </span>
      <span id="f5439"> Certainly, in all of them was lacking the something more which he found in himself and in the books. </span>
      <span id="f5440"> The Morses had shown him the best their social position could produce, and he was not impressed by it. </span>
      <span id="f5441"> A pauper himself, a slave to the money-lender, he knew himself the superior of those he met at the Morses&#39;; and, when his one decent suit of clothes was out of pawn, he moved among them a lord of life, quivering with a sense of outrage akin to what a prince would suffer if condemned to live with goat-herds.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5442">&#34;You hate and fear the socialists,&#34; he remarked to Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5443">Morse, one evening at dinner; &#34;but why? </span>
      <span id="f5444"> You know neither them nor their doctrines.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5445">The conversation had been swung in that direction by Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f5446">Morse, who had been invidiously singing the praises of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5447">Hapgood. </span>
      <span id="f5448"> The cashier was Martin&#39;s black beast, and his temper was a trifle short where the talker of platitudes was concerned.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5449">&#34;Yes,&#34; he had said, &#34;Charley Hapgood is what they call a rising young man--somebody told me as much. </span>
      <span id="f5450"> And it is true. </span>
      <span id="f5451"> He&#39;ll make the Governor&#39;s Chair before he dies, and, who knows? </span>
      <span id="f5452">maybe the United States Senate.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5453">&#34;What makes you think so?&#34; Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f5454">Morse had inquired.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5455">&#34;I&#39;ve heard him make a campaign speech. </span>
      <span id="f5456"> It was so cleverly stupid and unoriginal, and also so convincing, that the leaders cannot help but regard him as safe and sure, while his platitudes are so much like the platitudes of the average voter that--oh, well, you know you flatter any man by dressing up his own thoughts for him and presenting them to him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5457">&#34;I actually think you are jealous of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5458">Hapgood,&#34; Ruth had chimed in.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5459">&#34;Heaven forbid!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5460">The look of horror on Martin&#39;s face stirred Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f5461">Morse to belligerence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5462">&#34;You surely don&#39;t mean to say that Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5463">Hapgood is stupid?&#34; she demanded icily.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5464">&#34;No more than the average Republican,&#34; was the retort, &#34;or average Democrat, either. </span>
      <span id="f5465"> They are all stupid when they are not crafty, and very few of them are crafty. </span>
      <span id="f5466"> The only wise Republicans are the millionnaires and their conscious henchmen. </span>
      <span id="f5467"> They know which side their bread is buttered on, and they know why.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5468">&#34;I am a Republican,&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5469">Morse put in lightly. </span>
      <span id="f5470"> &#34;Pray, how do you classify me?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5471">&#34;Oh, you are an unconscious henchman.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5472">&#34;Henchman?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5473">&#34;Why, yes. </span>
      <span id="f5474"> You do corporation work. </span>
      <span id="f5475"> You have no working-class nor criminal practice. </span>
      <span id="f5476"> You don&#39;t depend upon wife-beaters and pickpockets for your income. </span>
      <span id="f5477"> You get your livelihood from the masters of society, and whoever feeds a man is that man&#39;s master. </span>
      <span id="f5478"> Yes, you are a henchman. </span>
      <span id="f5479">You are interested in advancing the interests of the aggregations of capital you serve.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5480">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5481">Morse&#39;s face was a trifle red.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5482">&#34;I confess, sir,&#34; he said, &#34;that you talk like a scoundrelly socialist.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5483">Then it was that Martin made his remark:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5484">&#34;You hate and fear the socialists; but why? </span>
      <span id="f5485"> You know neither them nor their doctrines.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5486">&#34;Your doctrine certainly sounds like socialism,&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5487">Morse replied, while Ruth gazed anxiously from one to the other, and Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f5488">Morse beamed happily at the opportunity afforded of rousing her liege lord&#39;s antagonism.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5489">&#34;Because I say Republicans are stupid, and hold that liberty, equality, and fraternity are exploded bubbles, does not make me a socialist,&#34; Martin said with a smile. </span>
      <span id="f5490"> &#34;Because I question Jefferson and the unscientific Frenchmen who informed his mind, does not make me a socialist. </span>
      <span id="f5491"> Believe me, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5492">Morse, you are far nearer socialism than I who am its avowed enemy.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5493">&#34;Now you please to be facetious,&#34; was all the other could say.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5494">&#34;Not at all. </span>
      <span id="f5495"> I speak in all seriousness. </span>
      <span id="f5496"> You still believe in equality, and yet you do the work of the corporations, and the corporations, from day to day, are busily engaged in burying equality. </span>
      <span id="f5497"> And you call me a socialist because I deny equality, because I affirm just what you live up to. </span>
      <span id="f5498"> The Republicans are foes to equality, though most of them fight the battle against equality with the very word itself the slogan on their lips. </span>
      <span id="f5499"> In the name of equality they destroy equality. </span>
      <span id="f5500"> That was why I called them stupid. </span>
      <span id="f5501"> As for myself, I am an individualist. </span>
      <span id="f5502"> I believe the race is to the swift, the battle to the strong. </span>
      <span id="f5503"> Such is the lesson I have learned from biology, or at least think I have learned. </span>
      <span id="f5504"> As I said, I am an individualist, and individualism is the hereditary and eternal foe of socialism.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5505">&#34;But you frequent socialist meetings,&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5506">Morse challenged.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5507">&#34;Certainly, just as spies frequent hostile camps. </span>
      <span id="f5508"> How else are you to learn about the enemy? </span>
      <span id="f5509"> Besides, I enjoy myself at their meetings. </span>
      <span id="f5510"> They are good fighters, and, right or wrong, they have read the books. </span>
      <span id="f5511"> Any one of them knows far more about sociology and all the other ologies than the average captain of industry. </span>
      <span id="f5512"> Yes, I have been to half a dozen of their meetings, but that doesn&#39;t make me a socialist any more than hearing Charley Hapgood orate made me a Republican.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5513">&#34;I can&#39;t help it,&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5514">Morse said feebly, &#34;but I still believe you incline that way.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5515">Bless me, Martin thought to himself, he doesn&#39;t know what I was talking about. </span>
      <span id="f5516"> He hasn&#39;t understood a word of it. </span>
      <span id="f5517"> What did he do with his education, anyway?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5518">Thus, in his development, Martin found himself face to face with economic morality, or the morality of class; and soon it became to him a grisly monster. </span>
      <span id="f5519"> Personally, he was an intellectual moralist, and more offending to him than platitudinous pomposity was the morality of those about him, which was a curious hotchpotch of the economic, the metaphysical, the sentimental, and the imitative.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5520">A sample of this curious messy mixture he encountered nearer home. </span>
      <span id="f5521"> His sister Marian had been keeping company with an industrious young mechanic, of German extraction, who, after thoroughly learning the trade, had set up for himself in a bicycle-repair shop. </span>
      <span id="f5522"> Also, having got the agency for a low-grade make of wheel, he was prosperous. </span>
      <span id="f5523"> Marian had called on Martin in his room a short time before to announce her engagement, during which visit she had playfully inspected Martin&#39;s palm and told his fortune. </span>
      <span id="f5524"> On her next visit she brought Hermann von Schmidt along with her. </span>
      <span id="f5525"> Martin did the honors and congratulated both of them in language so easy and graceful as to affect disagreeably the peasant-mind of his sister&#39;s lover. </span>
      <span id="f5526"> This bad impression was further heightened by Martin&#39;s reading aloud the half-dozen stanzas of verse with which he had commemorated Marian&#39;s previous visit. </span>
      <span id="f5527"> It was a bit of society verse, airy and delicate, which he had named &#34;The Palmist.&#34;  He was surprised, when he finished reading it, to note no enjoyment in his sister&#39;s face. </span>
      <span id="f5528">Instead, her eyes were fixed anxiously upon her betrothed, and Martin, following her gaze, saw spread on that worthy&#39;s asymmetrical features nothing but black and sullen disapproval. </span>
      <span id="f5529"> The incident passed over, they made an early departure, and Martin forgot all about it, though for the moment he had been puzzled that any woman, even of the working class, should not have been flattered and delighted by having poetry written about her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5530">Several evenings later Marian again visited him, this time alone. </span>
      <span id="f5531"> Nor did she waste time in coming to the point, upbraiding him sorrowfully for what he had done.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5532">&#34;Why, Marian,&#34; he chided, &#34;you talk as though you were ashamed of your relatives, or of your brother at any rate.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5533">&#34;And I am, too,&#34; she blurted out.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5534">Martin was bewildered by the tears of mortification he saw in her eyes. </span>
      <span id="f5535">The mood, whatever it was, was genuine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5536">&#34;But, Marian, why should your Hermann be jealous of my writing poetry about my own sister?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5537">&#34;He ain&#39;t jealous,&#34; she sobbed. </span>
      <span id="f5538"> &#34;He says it was indecent, ob--obscene.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5539">Martin emitted a long, low whistle of incredulity, then proceeded to resurrect and read a carbon copy of &#34;The Palmist.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5540">&#34;I can&#39;t see it,&#34; he said finally, proffering the manuscript to her. </span>
      <span id="f5541">&#34;Read it yourself and show me whatever strikes you as obscene--that was the word, wasn&#39;t it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5542">&#34;He says so, and he ought to know,&#34; was the answer, with a wave aside of the manuscript, accompanied by a look of loathing. </span>
      <span id="f5543"> &#34;And he says you&#39;ve got to tear it up. </span>
      <span id="f5544"> He says he won&#39;t have no wife of his with such things written about her which anybody can read. </span>
      <span id="f5545"> He says it&#39;s a disgrace, an&#39; he won&#39;t stand for it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5546">&#34;Now, look here, Marian, this is nothing but nonsense,&#34; Martin began; then abruptly changed his mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5547">He saw before him an unhappy girl, knew the futility of attempting to convince her husband or her, and, though the whole situation was absurd and preposterous, he resolved to surrender.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5548">&#34;All right,&#34; he announced, tearing the manuscript into half a dozen pieces and throwing it into the waste-basket.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5549">He contented himself with the knowledge that even then the original type- written manuscript was reposing in the office of a New York magazine. </span>
      <span id="f5550">Marian and her husband would never know, and neither himself nor they nor the world would lose if the pretty, harmless poem ever were published.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5551">Marian, starting to reach into the waste-basket, refrained.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5552">&#34;Can I?&#34; she pleaded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5553">He nodded his head, regarding her thoughtfully as she gathered the torn pieces of manuscript and tucked them into the pocket of her jacket--ocular evidence of the success of her mission. </span>
      <span id="f5554"> She reminded him of Lizzie Connolly, though there was less of fire and gorgeous flaunting life in her than in that other girl of the working class whom he had seen twice. </span>
      <span id="f5555">But they were on a par, the pair of them, in dress and carriage, and he smiled with inward amusement at the caprice of his fancy which suggested the appearance of either of them in Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f5556">Morse&#39;s drawing-room. </span>
      <span id="f5557"> The amusement faded, and he was aware of a great loneliness. </span>
      <span id="f5558"> This sister of his and the Morse drawing-room were milestones of the road he had travelled. </span>
      <span id="f5559"> And he had left them behind. </span>
      <span id="f5560"> He glanced affectionately about him at his few books. </span>
      <span id="f5561"> They were all the comrades left to him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5562">&#34;Hello, what&#39;s that?&#34; he demanded in startled surprise.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5563">Marian repeated her question.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5564">&#34;Why don&#39;t I go to work?&#34;  He broke into a laugh that was only half-hearted. </span>
      <span id="f5565"> &#34;That Hermann of yours has been talking to you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5566">She shook her head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5567">&#34;Don&#39;t lie,&#34; he commanded, and the nod of her head affirmed his charge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5568">&#34;Well, you tell that Hermann of yours to mind his own business; that when I write poetry about the girl he&#39;s keeping company with it&#39;s his business, but that outside of that he&#39;s got no say so. </span>
      <span id="f5569"> Understand?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5570">&#34;So you don&#39;t think I&#39;ll succeed as a writer, eh?&#34; he went on. </span>
      <span id="f5571"> &#34;You think I&#39;m no good?--that I&#39;ve fallen down and am a disgrace to the family?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5572">&#34;I think it would be much better if you got a job,&#34; she said firmly, and he saw she was sincere. </span>
      <span id="f5573"> &#34;Hermann says--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5574">&#34;Damn Hermann!&#34; he broke out good-naturedly. </span>
      <span id="f5575"> &#34;What I want to know is when you&#39;re going to get married. </span>
      <span id="f5576"> Also, you find out from your Hermann if he will deign to permit you to accept a wedding present from me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5577">He mused over the incident after she had gone, and once or twice broke out into laughter that was bitter as he saw his sister and her betrothed, all the members of his own class and the members of Ruth&#39;s class, directing their narrow little lives by narrow little formulas--herd-creatures, flocking together and patterning their lives by one another&#39;s opinions, failing of being individuals and of really living life because of the childlike formulas by which they were enslaved. </span>
      <span id="f5578"> He summoned them before him in apparitional procession: Bernard Higginbotham arm in arm with Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5579">Butler, Hermann von Schmidt cheek by jowl with Charley Hapgood, and one by one and in pairs he judged them and dismissed them--judged them by the standards of intellect and morality he had learned from the books. </span>
      <span id="f5580"> Vainly he asked: Where are the great souls, the great men and women? </span>
      <span id="f5581"> He found them not among the careless, gross, and stupid intelligences that answered the call of vision to his narrow room. </span>
      <span id="f5582">He felt a loathing for them such as Circe must have felt for her swine. </span>
      <span id="f5583">When he had dismissed the last one and thought himself alone, a late-comer entered, unexpected and unsummoned. </span>
      <span id="f5584"> Martin watched him and saw the stiff-rim, the square-cut, double-breasted coat and the swaggering shoulders, of the youthful hoodlum who had once been he.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5585">&#34;You were like all the rest, young fellow,&#34; Martin sneered. </span>
      <span id="f5586"> &#34;Your morality and your knowledge were just the same as theirs. </span>
      <span id="f5587"> You did not think and act for yourself. </span>
      <span id="f5588"> Your opinions, like your clothes, were ready made; your acts were shaped by popular approval. </span>
      <span id="f5589"> You were cock of your gang because others acclaimed you the real thing. </span>
      <span id="f5590"> You fought and ruled the gang, not because you liked to,--you know you really despised it,--but because the other fellows patted you on the shoulder. </span>
      <span id="f5591"> You licked Cheese- Face because you wouldn&#39;t give in, and you wouldn&#39;t give in partly because you were an abysmal brute and for the rest because you believed what every one about you believed, that the measure of manhood was the carnivorous ferocity displayed in injuring and marring fellow-creatures&#39; anatomies. </span>
      <span id="f5592"> Why, you whelp, you even won other fellows&#39; girls away from them, not because you wanted the girls, but because in the marrow of those about you, those who set your moral pace, was the instinct of the wild stallion and the bull-seal. </span>
      <span id="f5593"> Well, the years have passed, and what do you think about it now?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5594">As if in reply, the vision underwent a swift metamorphosis. </span>
      <span id="f5595"> The stiff- rim and the square-cut vanished, being replaced by milder garments; the toughness went out of the face, the hardness out of the eyes; and, the face, chastened and refined, was irradiated from an inner life of communion with beauty and knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f5596"> The apparition was very like his present self, and, as he regarded it, he noted the student-lamp by which it was illuminated, and the book over which it pored. </span>
      <span id="f5597"> He glanced at the title and read, &#34;The Science of AEsthetics.&#34;  Next, he entered into the apparition, trimmed the student-lamp, and himself went on reading &#34;The Science of AEsthetics.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>