<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XXXI</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f5834">CHAPTER XXXI</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f5835">Martin had encountered his sister Gertrude by chance on Broadway--as it proved, a most propitious yet disconcerting chance. </span>
      <span id="f5836"> Waiting on the corner for a car, she had seen him first, and noted the eager, hungry lines of his face and the desperate, worried look of his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f5837"> In truth, he was desperate and worried. </span>
      <span id="f5838"> He had just come from a fruitless interview with the pawnbroker, from whom he had tried to wring an additional loan on his wheel. </span>
      <span id="f5839"> The muddy fall weather having come on, Martin had pledged his wheel some time since and retained his black suit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5840">&#34;There&#39;s the black suit,&#34; the pawnbroker, who knew his every asset, had answered. </span>
      <span id="f5841"> &#34;You needn&#39;t tell me you&#39;ve gone and pledged it with that Jew, Lipka. </span>
      <span id="f5842"> Because if you have--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5843">The man had looked the threat, and Martin hastened to cry:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5844">&#34;No, no; I&#39;ve got it. </span>
      <span id="f5845"> But I want to wear it on a matter of business.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5846">&#34;All right,&#34; the mollified usurer had replied. </span>
      <span id="f5847"> &#34;And I want it on a matter of business before I can let you have any more money. </span>
      <span id="f5848"> You don&#39;t think I&#39;m in it for my health?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5849">&#34;But it&#39;s a forty-dollar wheel, in good condition,&#34; Martin had argued. </span>
      <span id="f5850">&#34;And you&#39;ve only let me have seven dollars on it. </span>
      <span id="f5851"> No, not even seven. </span>
      <span id="f5852">Six and a quarter; you took the interest in advance.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5853">&#34;If you want some more, bring the suit,&#34; had been the reply that sent Martin out of the stuffy little den, so desperate at heart as to reflect it in his face and touch his sister to pity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5854">Scarcely had they met when the Telegraph Avenue car came along and stopped to take on a crowd of afternoon shoppers. </span>
      <span id="f5855"> Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f5856">Higginbotham divined from the grip on her arm as he helped her on, that he was not going to follow her. </span>
      <span id="f5857"> She turned on the step and looked down upon him. </span>
      <span id="f5858">His haggard face smote her to the heart again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5859">&#34;Ain&#39;t you comin&#39;?&#34; she asked</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5860">The next moment she had descended to his side.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5861">&#34;I&#39;m walking--exercise, you know,&#34; he explained.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5862">&#34;Then I&#39;ll go along for a few blocks,&#34; she announced. </span>
      <span id="f5863"> &#34;Mebbe it&#39;ll do me good. </span>
      <span id="f5864"> I ain&#39;t ben feelin&#39; any too spry these last few days.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5865">Martin glanced at her and verified her statement in her general slovenly appearance, in the unhealthy fat, in the drooping shoulders, the tired face with the sagging lines, and in the heavy fall of her feet, without elasticity--a very caricature of the walk that belongs to a free and happy body.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5866">&#34;You&#39;d better stop here,&#34; he said, though she had already come to a halt at the first corner, &#34;and take the next car.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5867">&#34;My goodness!--if I ain&#39;t all tired a&#39;ready!&#34; she panted. </span>
      <span id="f5868"> &#34;But I&#39;m just as able to walk as you in them soles. </span>
      <span id="f5869"> They&#39;re that thin they&#39;ll bu&#39;st long before you git out to North Oakland.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5870">&#34;I&#39;ve a better pair at home,&#34; was the answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5871">&#34;Come out to dinner to-morrow,&#34; she invited irrelevantly. </span>
      <span id="f5872"> &#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5873">Higginbotham won&#39;t be there. </span>
      <span id="f5874"> He&#39;s goin&#39; to San Leandro on business.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5875">Martin shook his head, but he had failed to keep back the wolfish, hungry look that leapt into his eyes at the suggestion of dinner.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5876">&#34;You haven&#39;t a penny, Mart, and that&#39;s why you&#39;re walkin&#39;. </span>
      <span id="f5877"> Exercise!&#34; She tried to sniff contemptuously, but succeeded in producing only a sniffle. </span>
      <span id="f5878"> &#34;Here, lemme see.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5879">And, fumbling in her satchel, she pressed a five-dollar piece into his hand. </span>
      <span id="f5880"> &#34;I guess I forgot your last birthday, Mart,&#34; she mumbled lamely.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5881">Martin&#39;s hand instinctively closed on the piece of gold. </span>
      <span id="f5882"> In the same instant he knew he ought not to accept, and found himself struggling in the throes of indecision. </span>
      <span id="f5883"> That bit of gold meant food, life, and light in his body and brain, power to go on writing, and--who was to say?--maybe to write something that would bring in many pieces of gold. </span>
      <span id="f5884"> Clear on his vision burned the manuscripts of two essays he had just completed. </span>
      <span id="f5885"> He saw them under the table on top of the heap of returned manuscripts for which he had no stamps, and he saw their titles, just as he had typed them--&#34;The High Priests of Mystery,&#34; and &#34;The Cradle of Beauty.&#34;  He had never submitted them anywhere. </span>
      <span id="f5886"> They were as good as anything he had done in that line. </span>
      <span id="f5887"> If only he had stamps for them! </span>
      <span id="f5888"> Then the certitude of his ultimate success rose up in him, an able ally of hunger, and with a quick movement he slipped the coin into his pocket.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5889">&#34;I&#39;ll pay you back, Gertrude, a hundred times over,&#34; he gulped out, his throat painfully contracted and in his eyes a swift hint of moisture.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5890">&#34;Mark my words!&#34; he cried with abrupt positiveness. </span>
      <span id="f5891"> &#34;Before the year is out I&#39;ll put an even hundred of those little yellow-boys into your hand. </span>
      <span id="f5892">I don&#39;t ask you to believe me. </span>
      <span id="f5893"> All you have to do is wait and see.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5894">Nor did she believe. </span>
      <span id="f5895"> Her incredulity made her uncomfortable, and failing of other expedient, she said:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5896">&#34;I know you&#39;re hungry, Mart. </span>
      <span id="f5897"> It&#39;s sticking out all over you. </span>
      <span id="f5898"> Come in to meals any time. </span>
      <span id="f5899"> I&#39;ll send one of the children to tell you when Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5900">Higginbotham ain&#39;t to be there. </span>
      <span id="f5901"> An&#39; Mart--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5902">He waited, though he knew in his secret heart what she was about to say, so visible was her thought process to him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5903">&#34;Don&#39;t you think it&#39;s about time you got a job?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5904">&#34;You don&#39;t think I&#39;ll win out?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5905">She shook her head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5906">&#34;Nobody has faith in me, Gertrude, except myself.&#34;  His voice was passionately rebellious. </span>
      <span id="f5907"> &#34;I&#39;ve done good work already, plenty of it, and sooner or later it will sell.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5908">&#34;How do you know it is good?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5909">&#34;Because--&#34;  He faltered as the whole vast field of literature and the history of literature stirred in his brain and pointed the futility of his attempting to convey to her the reasons for his faith. </span>
      <span id="f5910"> &#34;Well, because it&#39;s better than ninety-nine per cent of what is published in the magazines.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5911">&#34;I wish&#39;t you&#39;d listen to reason,&#34; she answered feebly, but with unwavering belief in the correctness of her diagnosis of what was ailing him. </span>
      <span id="f5912"> &#34;I wish&#39;t you&#39;d listen to reason,&#34; she repeated, &#34;an&#39; come to dinner to-morrow.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5913">After Martin had helped her on the car, he hurried to the post-office and invested three of the five dollars in stamps; and when, later in the day, on the way to the Morse home, he stopped in at the post-office to weigh a large number of long, bulky envelopes, he affixed to them all the stamps save three of the two-cent denomination.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5914">It proved a momentous night for Martin, for after dinner he met Russ Brissenden. </span>
      <span id="f5915"> How he chanced to come there, whose friend he was or what acquaintance brought him, Martin did not know. </span>
      <span id="f5916"> Nor had he the curiosity to inquire about him of Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f5917"> In short, Brissenden struck Martin as anaemic and feather-brained, and was promptly dismissed from his mind. </span>
      <span id="f5918"> An hour later he decided that Brissenden was a boor as well, what of the way he prowled about from one room to another, staring at the pictures or poking his nose into books and magazines he picked up from the table or drew from the shelves. </span>
      <span id="f5919"> Though a stranger in the house he finally isolated himself in the midst of the company, huddling into a capacious Morris chair and reading steadily from a thin volume he had drawn from his pocket. </span>
      <span id="f5920"> As he read, he abstractedly ran his fingers, with a caressing movement, through his hair. </span>
      <span id="f5921"> Martin noticed him no more that evening, except once when he observed him chaffing with great apparent success with several of the young women.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5922">It chanced that when Martin was leaving, he overtook Brissenden already half down the walk to the street.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5923">&#34;Hello, is that you?&#34; Martin said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5924">The other replied with an ungracious grunt, but swung alongside. </span>
      <span id="f5925"> Martin made no further attempt at conversation, and for several blocks unbroken silence lay upon them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5926">&#34;Pompous old ass!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5927">The suddenness and the virulence of the exclamation startled Martin. </span>
      <span id="f5928"> He felt amused, and at the same time was aware of a growing dislike for the other.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5929">&#34;What do you go to such a place for?&#34; was abruptly flung at him after another block of silence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5930">&#34;Why do you?&#34; Martin countered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5931">&#34;Bless me, I don&#39;t know,&#34; came back. </span>
      <span id="f5932"> &#34;At least this is my first indiscretion. </span>
      <span id="f5933"> There are twenty-four hours in each day, and I must spend them somehow. </span>
      <span id="f5934"> Come and have a drink.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5935">&#34;All right,&#34; Martin answered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5936">The next moment he was nonplussed by the readiness of his acceptance. </span>
      <span id="f5937"> At home was several hours&#39; hack-work waiting for him before he went to bed, and after he went to bed there was a volume of Weismann waiting for him, to say nothing of Herbert Spencer&#39;s Autobiography, which was as replete for him with romance as any thrilling novel. </span>
      <span id="f5938"> Why should he waste any time with this man he did not like? </span>
      <span id="f5939">was his thought. </span>
      <span id="f5940"> And yet, it was not so much the man nor the drink as was it what was associated with the drink--the bright lights, the mirrors and dazzling array of glasses, the warm and glowing faces and the resonant hum of the voices of men. </span>
      <span id="f5941"> That was it, it was the voices of men, optimistic men, men who breathed success and spent their money for drinks like men. </span>
      <span id="f5942"> He was lonely, that was what was the matter with him; that was why he had snapped at the invitation as a bonita strikes at a white rag on a hook. </span>
      <span id="f5943"> Not since with Joe, at Shelly Hot Springs, with the one exception of the wine he took with the Portuguese grocer, had Martin had a drink at a public bar. </span>
      <span id="f5944">Mental exhaustion did not produce a craving for liquor such as physical exhaustion did, and he had felt no need for it. </span>
      <span id="f5945"> But just now he felt desire for the drink, or, rather, for the atmosphere wherein drinks were dispensed and disposed of. </span>
      <span id="f5946"> Such a place was the Grotto, where Brissenden and he lounged in capacious leather chairs and drank Scotch and soda.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5947">They talked. </span>
      <span id="f5948"> They talked about many things, and now Brissenden and now Martin took turn in ordering Scotch and soda. </span>
      <span id="f5949"> Martin, who was extremely strong-headed, marvelled at the other&#39;s capacity for liquor, and ever and anon broke off to marvel at the other&#39;s conversation. </span>
      <span id="f5950"> He was not long in assuming that Brissenden knew everything, and in deciding that here was the second intellectual man he had met. </span>
      <span id="f5951"> But he noted that Brissenden had what Professor Caldwell lacked--namely, fire, the flashing insight and perception, the flaming uncontrol of genius. </span>
      <span id="f5952"> Living language flowed from him. </span>
      <span id="f5953"> His thin lips, like the dies of a machine, stamped out phrases that cut and stung; or again, pursing caressingly about the inchoate sound they articulated, the thin lips shaped soft and velvety things, mellow phrases of glow and glory, of haunting beauty, reverberant of the mystery and inscrutableness of life; and yet again the thin lips were like a bugle, from which rang the crash and tumult of cosmic strife, phrases that sounded clear as silver, that were luminous as starry spaces, that epitomized the final word of science and yet said something more--the poet&#39;s word, the transcendental truth, elusive and without words which could express, and which none the less found expression in the subtle and all but ungraspable connotations of common words. </span>
      <span id="f5954"> He, by some wonder of vision, saw beyond the farthest outpost of empiricism, where was no language for narration, and yet, by some golden miracle of speech, investing known words with unknown significances, he conveyed to Martin&#39;s consciousness messages that were incommunicable to ordinary souls.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5955">Martin forgot his first impression of dislike. </span>
      <span id="f5956"> Here was the best the books had to offer coming true. </span>
      <span id="f5957"> Here was an intelligence, a living man for him to look up to. </span>
      <span id="f5958"> &#34;I am down in the dirt at your feet,&#34; Martin repeated to himself again and again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5959">&#34;You&#39;ve studied biology,&#34; he said aloud, in significant allusion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5960">To his surprise Brissenden shook his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5961">&#34;But you are stating truths that are substantiated only by biology,&#34; Martin insisted, and was rewarded by a blank stare. </span>
      <span id="f5962"> &#34;Your conclusions are in line with the books which you must have read.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5963">&#34;I am glad to hear it,&#34; was the answer. </span>
      <span id="f5964"> &#34;That my smattering of knowledge should enable me to short-cut my way to truth is most reassuring. </span>
      <span id="f5965"> As for myself, I never bother to find out if I am right or not. </span>
      <span id="f5966"> It is all valueless anyway. </span>
      <span id="f5967"> Man can never know the ultimate verities.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5968">&#34;You are a disciple of Spencer!&#34; Martin cried triumphantly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5969">&#34;I haven&#39;t read him since adolescence, and all I read then was his &#39;Education.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5970">&#34;I wish I could gather knowledge as carelessly,&#34; Martin broke out half an hour later. </span>
      <span id="f5971"> He had been closely analyzing Brissenden&#39;s mental equipment. </span>
      <span id="f5972">&#34;You are a sheer dogmatist, and that&#39;s what makes it so marvellous. </span>
      <span id="f5973"> You state dogmatically the latest facts which science has been able to establish only by a posteriori reasoning. </span>
      <span id="f5974"> You jump at correct conclusions. </span>
      <span id="f5975"> You certainly short-cut with a vengeance. </span>
      <span id="f5976"> You feel your way with the speed of light, by some hyperrational process, to truth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5977">&#34;Yes, that was what used to bother Father Joseph, and Brother Dutton,&#34; Brissenden replied. </span>
      <span id="f5978"> &#34;Oh, no,&#34; he added; &#34;I am not anything. </span>
      <span id="f5979"> It was a lucky trick of fate that sent me to a Catholic college for my education. </span>
      <span id="f5980">Where did you pick up what you know?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5981">And while Martin told him, he was busy studying Brissenden, ranging from a long, lean, aristocratic face and drooping shoulders to the overcoat on a neighboring chair, its pockets sagged and bulged by the freightage of many books. </span>
      <span id="f5982"> Brissenden&#39;s face and long, slender hands were browned by the sun--excessively browned, Martin thought. </span>
      <span id="f5983"> This sunburn bothered Martin. </span>
      <span id="f5984"> It was patent that Brissenden was no outdoor man. </span>
      <span id="f5985"> Then how had he been ravaged by the sun? </span>
      <span id="f5986"> Something morbid and significant attached to that sunburn, was Martin&#39;s thought as he returned to a study of the face, narrow, with high cheek-bones and cavernous hollows, and graced with as delicate and fine an aquiline nose as Martin had ever seen. </span>
      <span id="f5987"> There was nothing remarkable about the size of the eyes. </span>
      <span id="f5988"> They were neither large nor small, while their color was a nondescript brown; but in them smouldered a fire, or, rather, lurked an expression dual and strangely contradictory. </span>
      <span id="f5989"> Defiant, indomitable, even harsh to excess, they at the same time aroused pity. </span>
      <span id="f5990"> Martin found himself pitying him he knew not why, though he was soon to learn.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5991">&#34;Oh, I&#39;m a lunger,&#34; Brissenden announced, offhand, a little later, having already stated that he came from Arizona. </span>
      <span id="f5992"> &#34;I&#39;ve been down there a couple of years living on the climate.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5993">&#34;Aren&#39;t you afraid to venture it up in this climate?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5994">&#34;Afraid?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5995">There was no special emphasis of his repetition of Martin&#39;s word. </span>
      <span id="f5996"> But Martin saw in that ascetic face the advertisement that there was nothing of which it was afraid. </span>
      <span id="f5997"> The eyes had narrowed till they were eagle-like, and Martin almost caught his breath as he noted the eagle beak with its dilated nostrils, defiant, assertive, aggressive. </span>
      <span id="f5998"> Magnificent, was what he commented to himself, his blood thrilling at the sight. </span>
      <span id="f5999"> Aloud, he quoted:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6000">&#34;&#39;Under the bludgeoning of Chance    My head is bloody but unbowed.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6001">&#34;You like Henley,&#34; Brissenden said, his expression changing swiftly to large graciousness and tenderness. </span>
      <span id="f6002"> &#34;Of course, I couldn&#39;t have expected anything else of you. </span>
      <span id="f6003"> Ah, Henley! </span>
      <span id="f6004"> A brave soul. </span>
      <span id="f6005"> He stands out among contemporary rhymesters--magazine rhymesters--as a gladiator stands out in the midst of a band of eunuchs.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6006">&#34;You don&#39;t like the magazines,&#34; Martin softly impeached.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6007">&#34;Do you?&#34; was snarled back at him so savagely as to startle him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6008">&#34;I--I write, or, rather, try to write, for the magazines,&#34; Martin faltered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6009">&#34;That&#39;s better,&#34; was the mollified rejoinder. </span>
      <span id="f6010"> &#34;You try to write, but you don&#39;t succeed. </span>
      <span id="f6011"> I respect and admire your failure. </span>
      <span id="f6012"> I know what you write. </span>
      <span id="f6013"> I can see it with half an eye, and there&#39;s one ingredient in it that shuts it out of the magazines. </span>
      <span id="f6014"> It&#39;s guts, and magazines have no use for that particular commodity. </span>
      <span id="f6015"> What they want is wish-wash and slush, and God knows they get it, but not from you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6016">&#34;I&#39;m not above hack-work,&#34; Martin contended.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6017">&#34;On the contrary--&#34;  Brissenden paused and ran an insolent eye over Martin&#39;s objective poverty, passing from the well-worn tie and the saw- edged collar to the shiny sleeves of the coat and on to the slight fray of one cuff, winding up and dwelling upon Martin&#39;s sunken cheeks. </span>
      <span id="f6018"> &#34;On the contrary, hack-work is above you, so far above you that you can never hope to rise to it. </span>
      <span id="f6019"> Why, man, I could insult you by asking you to have something to eat.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6020">Martin felt the heat in his face of the involuntary blood, and Brissenden laughed triumphantly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6021">&#34;A full man is not insulted by such an invitation,&#34; he concluded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6022">&#34;You are a devil,&#34; Martin cried irritably.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6023">&#34;Anyway, I didn&#39;t ask you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6024">&#34;You didn&#39;t dare.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6025">&#34;Oh, I don&#39;t know about that. </span>
      <span id="f6026"> I invite you now.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6027">Brissenden half rose from his chair as he spoke, as if with the intention of departing to the restaurant forthwith.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6028">Martin&#39;s fists were tight-clenched, and his blood was drumming in his temples.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6029">&#34;Bosco! </span>
      <span id="f6030"> He eats &#39;em alive! </span>
      <span id="f6031"> Eats &#39;em alive!&#34;  Brissenden exclaimed, imitating the spieler of a locally famous snake-eater.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6032">&#34;I could certainly eat you alive,&#34; Martin said, in turn running insolent eyes over the other&#39;s disease-ravaged frame.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6033">&#34;Only I&#39;m not worthy of it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6034">&#34;On the contrary,&#34; Martin considered, &#34;because the incident is not worthy.&#34;  He broke into a laugh, hearty and wholesome. </span>
      <span id="f6035"> &#34;I confess you made a fool of me, Brissenden. </span>
      <span id="f6036"> That I am hungry and you are aware of it are only ordinary phenomena, and there&#39;s no disgrace. </span>
      <span id="f6037"> You see, I laugh at the conventional little moralities of the herd; then you drift by, say a sharp, true word, and immediately I am the slave of the same little moralities.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6038">&#34;You were insulted,&#34; Brissenden affirmed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6039">&#34;I certainly was, a moment ago. </span>
      <span id="f6040"> The prejudice of early youth, you know. </span>
      <span id="f6041">I learned such things then, and they cheapen what I have since learned. </span>
      <span id="f6042">They are the skeletons in my particular closet.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6043">&#34;But you&#39;ve got the door shut on them now?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6044">&#34;I certainly have.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6045">&#34;Sure?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6046">&#34;Sure.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6047">&#34;Then let&#39;s go and get something to eat.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6048">&#34;I&#39;ll go you,&#34; Martin answered, attempting to pay for the current Scotch and soda with the last change from his two dollars and seeing the waiter bullied by Brissenden into putting that change back on the table.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6049">Martin pocketed it with a grimace, and felt for a moment the kindly weight of Brissenden&#39;s hand upon his shoulder.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>