<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XXXII</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f6050">CHAPTER XXXII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f6051">Promptly, the next afternoon, Maria was excited by Martin&#39;s second visitor. </span>
      <span id="f6052"> But she did not lose her head this time, for she seated Brissenden in her parlor&#39;s grandeur of respectability.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6053">&#34;Hope you don&#39;t mind my coming?&#34; Brissenden began.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6054">&#34;No, no, not at all,&#34; Martin answered, shaking hands and waving him to the solitary chair, himself taking to the bed. </span>
      <span id="f6055"> &#34;But how did you know where I lived?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6056">&#34;Called up the Morses. </span>
      <span id="f6057"> Miss Morse answered the &#39;phone. </span>
      <span id="f6058"> And here I am.&#34; He tugged at his coat pocket and flung a thin volume on the table. </span>
      <span id="f6059">&#34;There&#39;s a book, by a poet. </span>
      <span id="f6060"> Read it and keep it.&#34;  And then, in reply to Martin&#39;s protest: &#34;What have I to do with books? </span>
      <span id="f6061"> I had another hemorrhage this morning. </span>
      <span id="f6062"> Got any whiskey? </span>
      <span id="f6063"> No, of course not. </span>
      <span id="f6064"> Wait a minute.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6065">He was off and away. </span>
      <span id="f6066"> Martin watched his long figure go down the outside steps, and, on turning to close the gate, noted with a pang the shoulders, which had once been broad, drawn in now over, the collapsed ruin of the chest. </span>
      <span id="f6067"> Martin got two tumblers, and fell to reading the book of verse, Henry Vaughn Marlow&#39;s latest collection.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6068">&#34;No Scotch,&#34; Brissenden announced on his return. </span>
      <span id="f6069"> &#34;The beggar sells nothing but American whiskey. </span>
      <span id="f6070"> But here&#39;s a quart of it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6071">&#34;I&#39;ll send one of the youngsters for lemons, and we&#39;ll make a toddy,&#34; Martin offered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6072">&#34;I wonder what a book like that will earn Marlow?&#34; he went on, holding up the volume in question.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6073">&#34;Possibly fifty dollars,&#34; came the answer. </span>
      <span id="f6074"> &#34;Though he&#39;s lucky if he pulls even on it, or if he can inveigle a publisher to risk bringing it out.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6075">&#34;Then one can&#39;t make a living out of poetry?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6076">Martin&#39;s tone and face alike showed his dejection.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6077">&#34;Certainly not. </span>
      <span id="f6078"> What fool expects to? </span>
      <span id="f6079"> Out of rhyming, yes. </span>
      <span id="f6080"> There&#39;s Bruce, and Virginia Spring, and Sedgwick. </span>
      <span id="f6081"> They do very nicely. </span>
      <span id="f6082"> But poetry--do you know how Vaughn Marlow makes his living?--teaching in a boys&#39; cramming-joint down in Pennsylvania, and of all private little hells such a billet is the limit. </span>
      <span id="f6083"> I wouldn&#39;t trade places with him if he had fifty years of life before him. </span>
      <span id="f6084"> And yet his work stands out from the ruck of the contemporary versifiers as a balas ruby among carrots. </span>
      <span id="f6085"> And the reviews he gets! </span>
      <span id="f6086"> Damn them, all of them, the crass manikins!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6087">&#34;Too much is written by the men who can&#39;t write about the men who do write,&#34; Martin concurred. </span>
      <span id="f6088"> &#34;Why, I was appalled at the quantities of rubbish written about Stevenson and his work.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6089">&#34;Ghouls and harpies!&#34; Brissenden snapped out with clicking teeth. </span>
      <span id="f6090"> &#34;Yes, I know the spawn--complacently pecking at him for his Father Damien letter, analyzing him, weighing him--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6091">&#34;Measuring him by the yardstick of their own miserable egos,&#34; Martin broke in.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6092">&#34;Yes, that&#39;s it, a good phrase,--mouthing and besliming the True, and Beautiful, and Good, and finally patting him on the back and saying, &#39;Good dog, Fido.&#39;  Faugh! </span>
      <span id="f6093"> &#39;The little chattering daws of men,&#39; Richard Realf called them the night he died.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6094">&#34;Pecking at star-dust,&#34; Martin took up the strain warmly; &#34;at the meteoric flight of the master-men. </span>
      <span id="f6095"> I once wrote a squib on them--the critics, or the reviewers, rather.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6096">&#34;Let&#39;s see it,&#34; Brissenden begged eagerly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6097">So Martin unearthed a carbon copy of &#34;Star-dust,&#34; and during the reading of it Brissenden chuckled, rubbed his hands, and forgot to sip his toddy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6098">&#34;Strikes me you&#39;re a bit of star-dust yourself, flung into a world of cowled gnomes who cannot see,&#34; was his comment at the end of it. </span>
      <span id="f6099"> &#34;Of course it was snapped up by the first magazine?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6100">Martin ran over the pages of his manuscript book. </span>
      <span id="f6101"> &#34;It has been refused by twenty-seven of them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6102">Brissenden essayed a long and hearty laugh, but broke down in a fit of coughing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6103">&#34;Say, you needn&#39;t tell me you haven&#39;t tackled poetry,&#34; he gasped. </span>
      <span id="f6104"> &#34;Let me see some of it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6105">&#34;Don&#39;t read it now,&#34; Martin pleaded. </span>
      <span id="f6106"> &#34;I want to talk with you. </span>
      <span id="f6107"> I&#39;ll make up a bundle and you can take it home.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6108">Brissenden departed with the &#34;Love-cycle,&#34; and &#34;The Peri and the Pearl,&#34; returning next day to greet Martin with:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6109">&#34;I want more.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6110">Not only did he assure Martin that he was a poet, but Martin learned that Brissenden also was one. </span>
      <span id="f6111"> He was swept off his feet by the other&#39;s work, and astounded that no attempt had been made to publish it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6112">&#34;A plague on all their houses!&#34; was Brissenden&#39;s answer to Martin&#39;s volunteering to market his work for him. </span>
      <span id="f6113"> &#34;Love Beauty for its own sake,&#34; was his counsel, &#34;and leave the magazines alone. </span>
      <span id="f6114"> Back to your ships and your sea--that&#39;s my advice to you, Martin Eden. </span>
      <span id="f6115"> What do you want in these sick and rotten cities of men? </span>
      <span id="f6116"> You are cutting your throat every day you waste in them trying to prostitute beauty to the needs of magazinedom. </span>
      <span id="f6117"> What was it you quoted me the other day?--Oh, yes, &#39;Man, the latest of the ephemera.&#39;  Well, what do you, the latest of the ephemera, want with fame? </span>
      <span id="f6118"> If you got it, it would be poison to you. </span>
      <span id="f6119"> You are too simple, too elemental, and too rational, by my faith, to prosper on such pap. </span>
      <span id="f6120"> I hope you never do sell a line to the magazines. </span>
      <span id="f6121"> Beauty is the only master to serve. </span>
      <span id="f6122"> Serve her and damn the multitude! </span>
      <span id="f6123"> Success! </span>
      <span id="f6124">What in hell&#39;s success if it isn&#39;t right there in your Stevenson sonnet, which outranks Henley&#39;s &#39;Apparition,&#39; in that &#39;Love-cycle,&#39; in those sea- poems?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6125">&#34;It is not in what you succeed in doing that you get your joy, but in the doing of it. </span>
      <span id="f6126"> You can&#39;t tell me. </span>
      <span id="f6127"> I know it. </span>
      <span id="f6128"> You know it. </span>
      <span id="f6129"> Beauty hurts you. </span>
      <span id="f6130"> It is an everlasting pain in you, a wound that does not heal, a knife of flame. </span>
      <span id="f6131"> Why should you palter with magazines? </span>
      <span id="f6132"> Let beauty be your end. </span>
      <span id="f6133"> Why should you mint beauty into gold? </span>
      <span id="f6134"> Anyway, you can&#39;t; so there&#39;s no use in my getting excited over it. </span>
      <span id="f6135"> You can read the magazines for a thousand years and you won&#39;t find the value of one line of Keats. </span>
      <span id="f6136">Leave fame and coin alone, sign away on a ship to-morrow, and go back to your sea.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6137">&#34;Not for fame, but for love,&#34; Martin laughed. </span>
      <span id="f6138"> &#34;Love seems to have no place in your Cosmos; in mine, Beauty is the handmaiden of Love.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6139">Brissenden looked at him pityingly and admiringly. </span>
      <span id="f6140"> &#34;You are so young, Martin boy, so young. </span>
      <span id="f6141"> You will flutter high, but your wings are of the finest gauze, dusted with the fairest pigments. </span>
      <span id="f6142"> Do not scorch them. </span>
      <span id="f6143"> But of course you have scorched them already. </span>
      <span id="f6144"> It required some glorified petticoat to account for that &#39;Love-cycle,&#39; and that&#39;s the shame of it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6145">&#34;It glorifies love as well as the petticoat,&#34; Martin laughed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6146">&#34;The philosophy of madness,&#34; was the retort. </span>
      <span id="f6147"> &#34;So have I assured myself when wandering in hasheesh dreams. </span>
      <span id="f6148"> But beware. </span>
      <span id="f6149"> These bourgeois cities will kill you. </span>
      <span id="f6150"> Look at that den of traitors where I met you. </span>
      <span id="f6151"> Dry rot is no name for it. </span>
      <span id="f6152"> One can&#39;t keep his sanity in such an atmosphere. </span>
      <span id="f6153"> It&#39;s degrading. </span>
      <span id="f6154"> There&#39;s not one of them who is not degrading, man and woman, all of them animated stomachs guided by the high intellectual and artistic impulses of clams--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6155">He broke off suddenly and regarded Martin. </span>
      <span id="f6156"> Then, with a flash of divination, he saw the situation. </span>
      <span id="f6157"> The expression on his face turned to wondering horror.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6158">&#34;And you wrote that tremendous &#39;Love-cycle&#39; to her--that pale, shrivelled, female thing!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6159">The next instant Martin&#39;s right hand had shot to a throttling clutch on his throat, and he was being shaken till his teeth rattled. </span>
      <span id="f6160"> But Martin, looking into his eyes, saw no fear there,--naught but a curious and mocking devil. </span>
      <span id="f6161"> Martin remembered himself, and flung Brissenden, by the neck, sidelong upon the bed, at the same moment releasing his hold.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6162">Brissenden panted and gasped painfully for a moment, then began to chuckle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6163">&#34;You had made me eternally your debtor had you shaken out the flame,&#34; he said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6164">&#34;My nerves are on a hair-trigger these days,&#34; Martin apologized. </span>
      <span id="f6165"> &#34;Hope I didn&#39;t hurt you. </span>
      <span id="f6166"> Here, let me mix a fresh toddy.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6167">&#34;Ah, you young Greek!&#34; Brissenden went on. </span>
      <span id="f6168"> &#34;I wonder if you take just pride in that body of yours. </span>
      <span id="f6169"> You are devilish strong. </span>
      <span id="f6170"> You are a young panther, a lion cub. </span>
      <span id="f6171"> Well, well, it is you who must pay for that strength.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6172">&#34;What do you mean?&#34; Martin asked curiously, passing aim a glass. </span>
      <span id="f6173"> &#34;Here, down this and be good.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6174">&#34;Because--&#34; Brissenden sipped his toddy and smiled appreciation of it. </span>
      <span id="f6175">&#34;Because of the women. </span>
      <span id="f6176"> They will worry you until you die, as they have already worried you, or else I was born yesterday. </span>
      <span id="f6177"> Now there&#39;s no use in your choking me; I&#39;m going to have my say. </span>
      <span id="f6178"> This is undoubtedly your calf love; but for Beauty&#39;s sake show better taste next time. </span>
      <span id="f6179"> What under heaven do you want with a daughter of the bourgeoisie? </span>
      <span id="f6180"> Leave them alone. </span>
      <span id="f6181">Pick out some great, wanton flame of a woman, who laughs at life and jeers at death and loves one while she may. </span>
      <span id="f6182"> There are such women, and they will love you just as readily as any pusillanimous product of bourgeois sheltered life.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6183">&#34;Pusillanimous?&#34; Martin protested.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6184">&#34;Just so, pusillanimous; prattling out little moralities that have been prattled into them, and afraid to live life. </span>
      <span id="f6185"> They will love you, Martin, but they will love their little moralities more. </span>
      <span id="f6186"> What you want is the magnificent abandon of life, the great free souls, the blazing butterflies and not the little gray moths. </span>
      <span id="f6187"> Oh, you will grow tired of them, too, of all the female things, if you are unlucky enough to live. </span>
      <span id="f6188">But you won&#39;t live. </span>
      <span id="f6189"> You won&#39;t go back to your ships and sea; therefore, you&#39;ll hang around these pest-holes of cities until your bones are rotten, and then you&#39;ll die.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6190">&#34;You can lecture me, but you can&#39;t make me talk back,&#34; Martin said. </span>
      <span id="f6191">&#34;After all, you have but the wisdom of your temperament, and the wisdom of my temperament is just as unimpeachable as yours.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6192">They disagreed about love, and the magazines, and many things, but they liked each other, and on Martin&#39;s part it was no less than a profound liking. </span>
      <span id="f6193"> Day after day they were together, if for no more than the hour Brissenden spent in Martin&#39;s stuffy room. </span>
      <span id="f6194"> Brissenden never arrived without his quart of whiskey, and when they dined together down-town, he drank Scotch and soda throughout the meal. </span>
      <span id="f6195"> He invariably paid the way for both, and it was through him that Martin learned the refinements of food, drank his first champagne, and made acquaintance with Rhenish wines.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6196">But Brissenden was always an enigma. </span>
      <span id="f6197"> With the face of an ascetic, he was, in all the failing blood of him, a frank voluptuary. </span>
      <span id="f6198"> He was unafraid to die, bitter and cynical of all the ways of living; and yet, dying, he loved life, to the last atom of it. </span>
      <span id="f6199"> He was possessed by a madness to live, to thrill, &#34;to squirm my little space in the cosmic dust whence I came,&#34; as he phrased it once himself. </span>
      <span id="f6200"> He had tampered with drugs and done many strange things in quest of new thrills, new sensations. </span>
      <span id="f6201"> As he told Martin, he had once gone three days without water, had done so voluntarily, in order to experience the exquisite delight of such a thirst assuaged. </span>
      <span id="f6202"> Who or what he was, Martin never learned. </span>
      <span id="f6203"> He was a man without a past, whose future was the imminent grave and whose present was a bitter fever of living.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>