<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f6204">CHAPTER XXXIII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f6205">Martin was steadily losing his battle. </span>
      <span id="f6206"> Economize as he would, the earnings from hack-work did not balance expenses. </span>
      <span id="f6207"> Thanksgiving found him with his black suit in pawn and unable to accept the Morses&#39; invitation to dinner. </span>
      <span id="f6208"> Ruth was not made happy by his reason for not coming, and the corresponding effect on him was one of desperation. </span>
      <span id="f6209"> He told her that he would come, after all; that he would go over to San Francisco, to the Transcontinental office, collect the five dollars due him, and with it redeem his suit of clothes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6210">In the morning he borrowed ten cents from Maria. </span>
      <span id="f6211"> He would have borrowed it, by preference, from Brissenden, but that erratic individual had disappeared. </span>
      <span id="f6212"> Two weeks had passed since Martin had seen him, and he vainly cudgelled his brains for some cause of offence. </span>
      <span id="f6213"> The ten cents carried Martin across the ferry to San Francisco, and as he walked up Market Street he speculated upon his predicament in case he failed to collect the money. </span>
      <span id="f6214"> There would then be no way for him to return to Oakland, and he knew no one in San Francisco from whom to borrow another ten cents.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6215">The door to the Transcontinental office was ajar, and Martin, in the act of opening it, was brought to a sudden pause by a loud voice from within, which exclaimed:- &#34;But that is not the question, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6216">Ford.&#34;  (Ford, Martin knew, from his correspondence, to be the editor&#39;s name.)  &#34;The question is, are you prepared to pay?--cash, and cash down, I mean? </span>
      <span id="f6217"> I am not interested in the prospects of the Transcontinental and what you expect to make it next year. </span>
      <span id="f6218"> What I want is to be paid for what I do. </span>
      <span id="f6219">And I tell you, right now, the Christmas Transcontinental don&#39;t go to press till I have the money in my hand. </span>
      <span id="f6220"> Good day. </span>
      <span id="f6221"> When you get the money, come and see me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6222">The door jerked open, and the man flung past Martin, with an angry countenance and went down the corridor, muttering curses and clenching his fists. </span>
      <span id="f6223"> Martin decided not to enter immediately, and lingered in the hallways for a quarter of an hour. </span>
      <span id="f6224"> Then he shoved the door open and walked in. </span>
      <span id="f6225"> It was a new experience, the first time he had been inside an editorial office. </span>
      <span id="f6226"> Cards evidently were not necessary in that office, for the boy carried word to an inner room that there was a man who wanted to see Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6227">Ford. </span>
      <span id="f6228"> Returning, the boy beckoned him from halfway across the room and led him to the private office, the editorial sanctum. </span>
      <span id="f6229"> Martin&#39;s first impression was of the disorder and cluttered confusion of the room. </span>
      <span id="f6230">Next he noticed a bewhiskered, youthful-looking man, sitting at a roll- top desk, who regarded him curiously. </span>
      <span id="f6231"> Martin marvelled at the calm repose of his face. </span>
      <span id="f6232"> It was evident that the squabble with the printer had not affected his equanimity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6233">&#34;I--I am Martin Eden,&#34; Martin began the conversation. </span>
      <span id="f6234"> (&#34;And I want my five dollars,&#34; was what he would have liked to say.)</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6235">But this was his first editor, and under the circumstances he did not desire to scare him too abruptly. </span>
      <span id="f6236"> To his surprise, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6237">Ford leaped into the air with a &#34;You don&#39;t say so!&#34; and the next moment, with both hands, was shaking Martin&#39;s hand effusively.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6238">&#34;Can&#39;t say how glad I am to see you, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6239">Eden. </span>
      <span id="f6240"> Often wondered what you were like.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6241">Here he held Martin off at arm&#39;s length and ran his beaming eyes over Martin&#39;s second-best suit, which was also his worst suit, and which was ragged and past repair, though the trousers showed the careful crease he had put in with Maria&#39;s flat-irons.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6242">&#34;I confess, though, I conceived you to be a much older man than you are. </span>
      <span id="f6243">Your story, you know, showed such breadth, and vigor, such maturity and depth of thought. </span>
      <span id="f6244"> A masterpiece, that story--I knew it when I had read the first half-dozen lines. </span>
      <span id="f6245"> Let me tell you how I first read it. </span>
      <span id="f6246"> But no; first let me introduce you to the staff.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6247">Still talking, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6248">Ford led him into the general office, where he introduced him to the associate editor, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6249">White, a slender, frail little man whose hand seemed strangely cold, as if he were suffering from a chill, and whose whiskers were sparse and silky.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6250">&#34;And Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6251">Ends, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6252">Eden. </span>
      <span id="f6253"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6254">Ends is our business manager, you know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6255">Martin found himself shaking hands with a cranky-eyed, bald-headed man, whose face looked youthful enough from what little could be seen of it, for most of it was covered by a snow-white beard, carefully trimmed--by his wife, who did it on Sundays, at which times she also shaved the back of his neck.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6256">The three men surrounded Martin, all talking admiringly and at once, until it seemed to him that they were talking against time for a wager.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6257">&#34;We often wondered why you didn&#39;t call,&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6258">White was saying.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6259">&#34;I didn&#39;t have the carfare, and I live across the Bay,&#34; Martin answered bluntly, with the idea of showing them his imperative need for the money.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6260">Surely, he thought to himself, my glad rags in themselves are eloquent advertisement of my need. </span>
      <span id="f6261"> Time and again, whenever opportunity offered, he hinted about the purpose of his business. </span>
      <span id="f6262"> But his admirers&#39; ears were deaf. </span>
      <span id="f6263"> They sang his praises, told him what they had thought of his story at first sight, what they subsequently thought, what their wives and families thought; but not one hint did they breathe of intention to pay him for it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6264">&#34;Did I tell you how I first read your story?&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6265">Ford said. </span>
      <span id="f6266"> &#34;Of course I didn&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f6267"> I was coming west from New York, and when the train stopped at Ogden, the train-boy on the new run brought aboard the current number of the Transcontinental.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6268">My God! </span>
      <span id="f6269">Martin thought; you can travel in a Pullman while I starve for the paltry five dollars you owe me. </span>
      <span id="f6270"> A wave of anger rushed over him. </span>
      <span id="f6271"> The wrong done him by the Transcontinental loomed colossal, for strong upon him were all the dreary months of vain yearning, of hunger and privation, and his present hunger awoke and gnawed at him, reminding him that he had eaten nothing since the day before, and little enough then. </span>
      <span id="f6272"> For the moment he saw red. </span>
      <span id="f6273"> These creatures were not even robbers. </span>
      <span id="f6274"> They were sneak-thieves. </span>
      <span id="f6275"> By lies and broken promises they had tricked him out of his story. </span>
      <span id="f6276"> Well, he would show them. </span>
      <span id="f6277"> And a great resolve surged into his will to the effect that he would not leave the office until he got his money. </span>
      <span id="f6278"> He remembered, if he did not get it, that there was no way for him to go back to Oakland. </span>
      <span id="f6279"> He controlled himself with an effort, but not before the wolfish expression of his face had awed and perturbed them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6280">They became more voluble than ever. </span>
      <span id="f6281"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6282">Ford started anew to tell how he had first read &#34;The Ring of Bells,&#34; and Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6283">Ends at the same time was striving to repeat his niece&#39;s appreciation of &#34;The Ring of Bells,&#34; said niece being a school-teacher in Alameda.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6284">&#34;I&#39;ll tell you what I came for,&#34; Martin said finally. </span>
      <span id="f6285"> &#34;To be paid for that story all of you like so well. </span>
      <span id="f6286"> Five dollars, I believe, is what you promised me would be paid on publication.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6287">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6288">Ford, with an expression on his mobile features of mediate and happy acquiescence, started to reach for his pocket, then turned suddenly to Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6289">Ends, and said that he had left his money home. </span>
      <span id="f6290"> That Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6291">Ends resented this, was patent; and Martin saw the twitch of his arm as if to protect his trousers pocket. </span>
      <span id="f6292"> Martin knew that the money was there.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6293">&#34;I am sorry,&#34; said Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6294">Ends, &#34;but I paid the printer not an hour ago, and he took my ready change. </span>
      <span id="f6295"> It was careless of me to be so short; but the bill was not yet due, and the printer&#39;s request, as a favor, to make an immediate advance, was quite unexpected.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6296">Both men looked expectantly at Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6297">White, but that gentleman laughed and shrugged his shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f6298"> His conscience was clean at any rate. </span>
      <span id="f6299"> He had come into the Transcontinental to learn magazine-literature, instead of which he had principally learned finance. </span>
      <span id="f6300"> The Transcontinental owed him four months&#39; salary, and he knew that the printer must be appeased before the associate editor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6301">&#34;It&#39;s rather absurd, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6302">Eden, to have caught us in this shape,&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6303">Ford preambled airily. </span>
      <span id="f6304"> &#34;All carelessness, I assure you. </span>
      <span id="f6305"> But I&#39;ll tell you what we&#39;ll do. </span>
      <span id="f6306"> We&#39;ll mail you a check the first thing in the morning. </span>
      <span id="f6307">You have Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6308">Eden&#39;s address, haven&#39;t you, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6309">Ends?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6310">Yes, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6311">Ends had the address, and the check would be mailed the first thing in the morning. </span>
      <span id="f6312"> Martin&#39;s knowledge of banks and checks was hazy, but he could see no reason why they should not give him the check on this day just as well as on the next.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6313">&#34;Then it is understood, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6314">Eden, that we&#39;ll mail you the check to-morrow?&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6315">Ford said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6316">&#34;I need the money to-day,&#34; Martin answered stolidly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6317">&#34;The unfortunate circumstances--if you had chanced here any other day,&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6318">Ford began suavely, only to be interrupted by Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6319">Ends, whose cranky eyes justified themselves in his shortness of temper.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6320">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6321">Ford has already explained the situation,&#34; he said with asperity. </span>
      <span id="f6322">&#34;And so have I. </span>
      <span id="f6323"> The check will be mailed--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6324">&#34;I also have explained,&#34; Martin broke in, &#34;and I have explained that I want the money to-day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6325">He had felt his pulse quicken a trifle at the business manager&#39;s brusqueness, and upon him he kept an alert eye, for it was in that gentleman&#39;s trousers pocket that he divined the Transcontinental&#39;s ready cash was reposing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6326">&#34;It is too bad--&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6327">Ford began.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6328">But at that moment, with an impatient movement, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6329">Ends turned as if about to leave the room. </span>
      <span id="f6330"> At the same instant Martin sprang for him, clutching him by the throat with one hand in such fashion that Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6331">Ends&#39; snow-white beard, still maintaining its immaculate trimness, pointed ceilingward at an angle of forty-five degrees. </span>
      <span id="f6332"> To the horror of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6333">White and Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6334">Ford, they saw their business manager shaken like an Astrakhan rug.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6335">&#34;Dig up, you venerable discourager of rising young talent!&#34; Martin exhorted. </span>
      <span id="f6336"> &#34;Dig up, or I&#39;ll shake it out of you, even if it&#39;s all in nickels.&#34;  Then, to the two affrighted onlookers: &#34;Keep away! </span>
      <span id="f6337"> If you interfere, somebody&#39;s liable to get hurt.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6338">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6339">Ends was choking, and it was not until the grip on his throat was eased that he was able to signify his acquiescence in the digging-up programme. </span>
      <span id="f6340"> All together, after repeated digs, its trousers pocket yielded four dollars and fifteen cents.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6341">&#34;Inside out with it,&#34; Martin commanded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6342">An additional ten cents fell out. </span>
      <span id="f6343"> Martin counted the result of his raid a second time to make sure.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6344">&#34;You next!&#34; he shouted at Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6345">Ford. </span>
      <span id="f6346"> &#34;I want seventy-five cents more.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6347">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6348">Ford did not wait, but ransacked his pockets, with the result of sixty cents.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6349">&#34;Sure that is all?&#34; Martin demanded menacingly, possessing himself of it. </span>
      <span id="f6350">&#34;What have you got in your vest pockets?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6351">In token of his good faith, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6352">Ford turned two of his pockets inside out. </span>
      <span id="f6353"> A strip of cardboard fell to the floor from one of them. </span>
      <span id="f6354"> He recovered it and was in the act of returning it, when Martin cried:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6355">&#34;What&#39;s that?--A ferry ticket? </span>
      <span id="f6356"> Here, give it to me. </span>
      <span id="f6357"> It&#39;s worth ten cents. </span>
      <span id="f6358"> I&#39;ll credit you with it. </span>
      <span id="f6359"> I&#39;ve now got four dollars and ninety- five cents, including the ticket. </span>
      <span id="f6360"> Five cents is still due me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6361">He looked fiercely at Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6362">White, and found that fragile creature in the act of handing him a nickel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6363">&#34;Thank you,&#34; Martin said, addressing them collectively. </span>
      <span id="f6364"> &#34;I wish you a good day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6365">&#34;Robber!&#34; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6366">Ends snarled after him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6367">&#34;Sneak-thief!&#34; Martin retorted, slamming the door as he passed out.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6368">Martin was elated--so elated that when he recollected that The Hornet owed him fifteen dollars for &#34;The Peri and the Pearl,&#34; he decided forthwith to go and collect it. </span>
      <span id="f6369"> But The Hornet was run by a set of clean- shaven, strapping young men, frank buccaneers who robbed everything and everybody, not excepting one another. </span>
      <span id="f6370"> After some breakage of the office furniture, the editor (an ex-college athlete), ably assisted by the business manager, an advertising agent, and the porter, succeeded in removing Martin from the office and in accelerating, by initial impulse, his descent of the first flight of stairs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6371">&#34;Come again, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6372">Eden; glad to see you any time,&#34; they laughed down at him from the landing above.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6373">Martin grinned as he picked himself up.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6374">&#34;Phew!&#34; he murmured back. </span>
      <span id="f6375"> &#34;The Transcontinental crowd were nanny-goats, but you fellows are a lot of prize-fighters.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6376">More laughter greeted this.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6377">&#34;I must say, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6378">Eden,&#34; the editor of The Hornet called down, &#34;that for a poet you can go some yourself. </span>
      <span id="f6379"> Where did you learn that right cross--if I may ask?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6380">&#34;Where you learned that half-Nelson,&#34; Martin answered. </span>
      <span id="f6381"> &#34;Anyway, you&#39;re going to have a black eye.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6382">&#34;I hope your neck doesn&#39;t stiffen up,&#34; the editor wished solicitously: &#34;What do you say we all go out and have a drink on it--not the neck, of course, but the little rough-house?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6383">&#34;I&#39;ll go you if I lose,&#34; Martin accepted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6384">And robbers and robbed drank together, amicably agreeing that the battle was to the strong, and that the fifteen dollars for &#34;The Peri and the Pearl&#34; belonged by right to The Hornet&#39;s editorial staff.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>