<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XXXIV</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f6385">CHAPTER XXXIV</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f6386">Arthur remained at the gate while Ruth climbed Maria&#39;s front steps. </span>
      <span id="f6387"> She heard the rapid click of the type-writer, and when Martin let her in, found him on the last page of a manuscript. </span>
      <span id="f6388"> She had come to make certain whether or not he would be at their table for Thanksgiving dinner; but before she could broach the subject Martin plunged into the one with which he was full.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6389">&#34;Here, let me read you this,&#34; he cried, separating the carbon copies and running the pages of manuscript into shape. </span>
      <span id="f6390"> &#34;It&#39;s my latest, and different from anything I&#39;ve done. </span>
      <span id="f6391"> It is so altogether different that I am almost afraid of it, and yet I&#39;ve a sneaking idea it is good. </span>
      <span id="f6392"> You be judge. </span>
      <span id="f6393"> It&#39;s an Hawaiian story. </span>
      <span id="f6394"> I&#39;ve called it &#39;Wiki-wiki.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6395">His face was bright with the creative glow, though she shivered in the cold room and had been struck by the coldness of his hands at greeting. </span>
      <span id="f6396">She listened closely while he read, and though he from time to time had seen only disapprobation in her face, at the close he asked:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6397">&#34;Frankly, what do you think of it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6398">&#34;I--I don&#39;t know,&#34; she, answered. </span>
      <span id="f6399"> &#34;Will it--do you think it will sell?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6400">&#34;I&#39;m afraid not,&#34; was the confession. </span>
      <span id="f6401"> &#34;It&#39;s too strong for the magazines. </span>
      <span id="f6402"> But it&#39;s true, on my word it&#39;s true.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6403">&#34;But why do you persist in writing such things when you know they won&#39;t sell?&#34; she went on inexorably. </span>
      <span id="f6404"> &#34;The reason for your writing is to make a living, isn&#39;t it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6405">&#34;Yes, that&#39;s right; but the miserable story got away with me. </span>
      <span id="f6406"> I couldn&#39;t help writing it. </span>
      <span id="f6407"> It demanded to be written.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6408">&#34;But that character, that Wiki-Wiki, why do you make him talk so roughly? </span>
      <span id="f6409">Surely it will offend your readers, and surely that is why the editors are justified in refusing your work.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6410">&#34;Because the real Wiki-Wiki would have talked that way.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6411">&#34;But it is not good taste.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6412">&#34;It is life,&#34; he replied bluntly. </span>
      <span id="f6413"> &#34;It is real. </span>
      <span id="f6414"> It is true. </span>
      <span id="f6415"> And I must write life as I see it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6416">She made no answer, and for an awkward moment they sat silent. </span>
      <span id="f6417"> It was because he loved her that he did not quite understand her, and she could not understand him because he was so large that he bulked beyond her horizon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6418">&#34;Well, I&#39;ve collected from the Transcontinental,&#34; he said in an effort to shift the conversation to a more comfortable subject. </span>
      <span id="f6419"> The picture of the bewhiskered trio, as he had last seen them, mulcted of four dollars and ninety cents and a ferry ticket, made him chuckle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6420">&#34;Then you&#39;ll come!&#34; she cried joyously. </span>
      <span id="f6421"> &#34;That was what I came to find out.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6422">&#34;Come?&#34; he muttered absently. </span>
      <span id="f6423"> &#34;Where?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6424">&#34;Why, to dinner to-morrow. </span>
      <span id="f6425"> You know you said you&#39;d recover your suit if you got that money.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6426">&#34;I forgot all about it,&#34; he said humbly. </span>
      <span id="f6427"> &#34;You see, this morning the poundman got Maria&#39;s two cows and the baby calf, and--well, it happened that Maria didn&#39;t have any money, and so I had to recover her cows for her. </span>
      <span id="f6428"> That&#39;s where the Transcontinental fiver went--&#39;The Ring of Bells&#39; went into the poundman&#39;s pocket.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6429">&#34;Then you won&#39;t come?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6430">He looked down at his clothing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6431">&#34;I can&#39;t.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6432">Tears of disappointment and reproach glistened in her blue eyes, but she said nothing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6433">&#34;Next Thanksgiving you&#39;ll have dinner with me in Delmonico&#39;s,&#34; he said cheerily; &#34;or in London, or Paris, or anywhere you wish. </span>
      <span id="f6434"> I know it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6435">&#34;I saw in the paper a few days ago,&#34; she announced abruptly, &#34;that there had been several local appointments to the Railway Mail. </span>
      <span id="f6436"> You passed first, didn&#39;t you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6437">He was compelled to admit that the call had come for him, but that he had declined it. </span>
      <span id="f6438"> &#34;I was so sure--I am so sure--of myself,&#34; he concluded. </span>
      <span id="f6439"> &#34;A year from now I&#39;ll be earning more than a dozen men in the Railway Mail. </span>
      <span id="f6440">You wait and see.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6441">&#34;Oh,&#34; was all she said, when he finished. </span>
      <span id="f6442"> She stood up, pulling at her gloves. </span>
      <span id="f6443"> &#34;I must go, Martin. </span>
      <span id="f6444"> Arthur is waiting for me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6445">He took her in his arms and kissed her, but she proved a passive sweetheart. </span>
      <span id="f6446"> There was no tenseness in her body, her arms did not go around him, and her lips met his without their wonted pressure.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6447">She was angry with him, he concluded, as he returned from the gate. </span>
      <span id="f6448"> But why? </span>
      <span id="f6449"> It was unfortunate that the poundman had gobbled Maria&#39;s cows. </span>
      <span id="f6450"> But it was only a stroke of fate. </span>
      <span id="f6451"> Nobody could be blamed for it. </span>
      <span id="f6452"> Nor did it enter his head that he could have done aught otherwise than what he had done. </span>
      <span id="f6453"> Well, yes, he was to blame a little, was his next thought, for having refused the call to the Railway Mail. </span>
      <span id="f6454"> And she had not liked &#34;Wiki- Wiki.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6455">He turned at the head of the steps to meet the letter-carrier on his afternoon round. </span>
      <span id="f6456"> The ever recurrent fever of expectancy assailed Martin as he took the bundle of long envelopes. </span>
      <span id="f6457"> One was not long. </span>
      <span id="f6458"> It was short and thin, and outside was printed the address of The New York Outview. </span>
      <span id="f6459"> He paused in the act of tearing the envelope open. </span>
      <span id="f6460"> It could not be an acceptance. </span>
      <span id="f6461"> He had no manuscripts with that publication. </span>
      <span id="f6462"> Perhaps--his heart almost stood still at the--wild thought--perhaps they were ordering an article from him; but the next instant he dismissed the surmise as hopelessly impossible.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6463">It was a short, formal letter, signed by the office editor, merely informing him that an anonymous letter which they had received was enclosed, and that he could rest assured the Outview&#39;s staff never under any circumstances gave consideration to anonymous correspondence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6464">The enclosed letter Martin found to be crudely printed by hand. </span>
      <span id="f6465"> It was a hotchpotch of illiterate abuse of Martin, and of assertion that the &#34;so- called Martin Eden&#34; who was selling stories to magazines was no writer at all, and that in reality he was stealing stories from old magazines, typing them, and sending them out as his own. </span>
      <span id="f6466"> The envelope was postmarked &#34;San Leandro.&#34;  Martin did not require a second thought to discover the author. </span>
      <span id="f6467"> Higginbotham&#39;s grammar, Higginbotham&#39;s colloquialisms, Higginbotham&#39;s mental quirks and processes, were apparent throughout. </span>
      <span id="f6468"> Martin saw in every line, not the fine Italian hand, but the coarse grocer&#39;s fist, of his brother-in-law.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6469">But why? </span>
      <span id="f6470">he vainly questioned. </span>
      <span id="f6471"> What injury had he done Bernard Higginbotham? </span>
      <span id="f6472"> The thing was so unreasonable, so wanton. </span>
      <span id="f6473"> There was no explaining it. </span>
      <span id="f6474"> In the course of the week a dozen similar letters were forwarded to Martin by the editors of various Eastern magazines. </span>
      <span id="f6475"> The editors were behaving handsomely, Martin concluded. </span>
      <span id="f6476"> He was wholly unknown to them, yet some of them had even been sympathetic. </span>
      <span id="f6477"> It was evident that they detested anonymity. </span>
      <span id="f6478"> He saw that the malicious attempt to hurt him had failed. </span>
      <span id="f6479"> In fact, if anything came of it, it was bound to be good, for at least his name had been called to the attention of a number of editors. </span>
      <span id="f6480"> Sometime, perhaps, reading a submitted manuscript of his, they might remember him as the fellow about whom they had received an anonymous letter. </span>
      <span id="f6481"> And who was to say that such a remembrance might not sway the balance of their judgment just a trifle in his favor?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6482">It was about this time that Martin took a great slump in Maria&#39;s estimation. </span>
      <span id="f6483"> He found her in the kitchen one morning groaning with pain, tears of weakness running down her cheeks, vainly endeavoring to put through a large ironing. </span>
      <span id="f6484"> He promptly diagnosed her affliction as La Grippe, dosed her with hot whiskey (the remnants in the bottles for which Brissenden was responsible), and ordered her to bed. </span>
      <span id="f6485"> But Maria was refractory. </span>
      <span id="f6486"> The ironing had to be done, she protested, and delivered that night, or else there would be no food on the morrow for the seven small and hungry Silvas.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6487">To her astonishment (and it was something that she never ceased from relating to her dying day), she saw Martin Eden seize an iron from the stove and throw a fancy shirt-waist on the ironing-board. </span>
      <span id="f6488"> It was Kate Flanagan&#39;s best Sunday waist, than whom there was no more exacting and fastidiously dressed woman in Maria&#39;s world. </span>
      <span id="f6489"> Also, Miss Flanagan had sent special instruction that said waist must be delivered by that night. </span>
      <span id="f6490">As every one knew, she was keeping company with John Collins, the blacksmith, and, as Maria knew privily, Miss Flanagan and Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6491">Collins were going next day to Golden Gate Park. </span>
      <span id="f6492"> Vain was Maria&#39;s attempt to rescue the garment. </span>
      <span id="f6493"> Martin guided her tottering footsteps to a chair, from where she watched him with bulging eyes. </span>
      <span id="f6494"> In a quarter of the time it would have taken her she saw the shirt-waist safely ironed, and ironed as well as she could have done it, as Martin made her grant.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6495">&#34;I could work faster,&#34; he explained, &#34;if your irons were only hotter.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6496">To her, the irons he swung were much hotter than she ever dared to use.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6497">&#34;Your sprinkling is all wrong,&#34; he complained next. </span>
      <span id="f6498"> &#34;Here, let me teach you how to sprinkle. </span>
      <span id="f6499"> Pressure is what&#39;s wanted. </span>
      <span id="f6500"> Sprinkle under pressure if you want to iron fast.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6501">He procured a packing-case from the woodpile in the cellar, fitted a cover to it, and raided the scrap-iron the Silva tribe was collecting for the junkman. </span>
      <span id="f6502"> With fresh-sprinkled garments in the box, covered with the board and pressed by the iron, the device was complete and in operation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6503">&#34;Now you watch me, Maria,&#34; he said, stripping off to his undershirt and gripping an iron that was what he called &#34;really hot.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6504">&#34;An&#39; when he feenish da iron&#39; he washa da wools,&#34; as she described it afterward. </span>
      <span id="f6505"> &#34;He say, &#39;Maria, you are da greata fool. </span>
      <span id="f6506"> I showa you how to washa da wools,&#39; an&#39; he shows me, too. </span>
      <span id="f6507"> Ten minutes he maka da machine--one barrel, one wheel-hub, two poles, justa like dat.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6508">Martin had learned the contrivance from Joe at the Shelly Hot Springs. </span>
      <span id="f6509">The old wheel-hub, fixed on the end of the upright pole, constituted the plunger. </span>
      <span id="f6510"> Making this, in turn, fast to the spring-pole attached to the kitchen rafters, so that the hub played upon the woollens in the barrel, he was able, with one hand, thoroughly to pound them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6511">&#34;No more Maria washa da wools,&#34; her story always ended. </span>
      <span id="f6512"> &#34;I maka da kids worka da pole an&#39; da hub an&#39; da barrel. </span>
      <span id="f6513"> Him da smarta man, Mister Eden.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6514">Nevertheless, by his masterly operation and improvement of her kitchen- laundry he fell an immense distance in her regard. </span>
      <span id="f6515"> The glamour of romance with which her imagination had invested him faded away in the cold light of fact that he was an ex-laundryman. </span>
      <span id="f6516"> All his books, and his grand friends who visited him in carriages or with countless bottles of whiskey, went for naught. </span>
      <span id="f6517"> He was, after all, a mere workingman, a member of her own class and caste. </span>
      <span id="f6518"> He was more human and approachable, but, he was no longer mystery.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6519">Martin&#39;s alienation from his family continued. </span>
      <span id="f6520"> Following upon Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6521">Higginbotham&#39;s unprovoked attack, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6522">Hermann von Schmidt showed his hand. </span>
      <span id="f6523"> The fortunate sale of several storiettes, some humorous verse, and a few jokes gave Martin a temporary splurge of prosperity. </span>
      <span id="f6524"> Not only did he partially pay up his bills, but he had sufficient balance left to redeem his black suit and wheel. </span>
      <span id="f6525"> The latter, by virtue of a twisted crank-hanger, required repairing, and, as a matter of friendliness with his future brother-in-law, he sent it to Von Schmidt&#39;s shop.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6526">The afternoon of the same day Martin was pleased by the wheel being delivered by a small boy. </span>
      <span id="f6527"> Von Schmidt was also inclined to be friendly, was Martin&#39;s conclusion from this unusual favor. </span>
      <span id="f6528"> Repaired wheels usually had to be called for. </span>
      <span id="f6529"> But when he examined the wheel, he discovered no repairs had been made. </span>
      <span id="f6530"> A little later in the day he telephoned his sister&#39;s betrothed, and learned that that person didn&#39;t want anything to do with him in &#34;any shape, manner, or form.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6531">&#34;Hermann von Schmidt,&#34; Martin answered cheerfully, &#34;I&#39;ve a good mind to come over and punch that Dutch nose of yours.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6532">&#34;You come to my shop,&#34; came the reply, &#34;an&#39; I&#39;ll send for the police. </span>
      <span id="f6533"> An&#39; I&#39;ll put you through, too. </span>
      <span id="f6534"> Oh, I know you, but you can&#39;t make no rough- house with me. </span>
      <span id="f6535"> I don&#39;t want nothin&#39; to do with the likes of you. </span>
      <span id="f6536"> You&#39;re a loafer, that&#39;s what, an&#39; I ain&#39;t asleep. </span>
      <span id="f6537"> You ain&#39;t goin&#39; to do no spongin&#39; off me just because I&#39;m marryin&#39; your sister. </span>
      <span id="f6538"> Why don&#39;t you go to work an&#39; earn an honest livin&#39;, eh? </span>
      <span id="f6539"> Answer me that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6540">Martin&#39;s philosophy asserted itself, dissipating his anger, and he hung up the receiver with a long whistle of incredulous amusement. </span>
      <span id="f6541"> But after the amusement came the reaction, and he was oppressed by his loneliness. </span>
      <span id="f6542">Nobody understood him, nobody seemed to have any use for him, except Brissenden, and Brissenden had disappeared, God alone knew where.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6543">Twilight was falling as Martin left the fruit store and turned homeward, his marketing on his arm. </span>
      <span id="f6544"> At the corner an electric car had stopped, and at sight of a lean, familiar figure alighting, his heart leapt with joy. </span>
      <span id="f6545">It was Brissenden, and in the fleeting glimpse, ere the car started up, Martin noted the overcoat pockets, one bulging with books, the other bulging with a quart bottle of whiskey.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>