<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f6546">CHAPTER XXXV</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f6547">Brissenden gave no explanation of his long absence, nor did Martin pry into it. </span>
      <span id="f6548"> He was content to see his friend&#39;s cadaverous face opposite him through the steam rising from a tumbler of toddy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6549">&#34;I, too, have not been idle,&#34; Brissenden proclaimed, after hearing Martin&#39;s account of the work he had accomplished.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6550">He pulled a manuscript from his inside coat pocket and passed it to Martin, who looked at the title and glanced up curiously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6551">&#34;Yes, that&#39;s it,&#34; Brissenden laughed. </span>
      <span id="f6552"> &#34;Pretty good title, eh? </span>
      <span id="f6553">&#39;Ephemera&#39;--it is the one word. </span>
      <span id="f6554"> And you&#39;re responsible for it, what of your _man_, who is always the erected, the vitalized inorganic, the latest of the ephemera, the creature of temperature strutting his little space on the thermometer. </span>
      <span id="f6555"> It got into my head and I had to write it to get rid of it. </span>
      <span id="f6556"> Tell me what you think of it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6557">Martin&#39;s face, flushed at first, paled as he read on. </span>
      <span id="f6558"> It was perfect art. </span>
      <span id="f6559"> Form triumphed over substance, if triumph it could be called where the last conceivable atom of substance had found expression in so perfect construction as to make Martin&#39;s head swim with delight, to put passionate tears into his eyes, and to send chills creeping up and down his back. </span>
      <span id="f6560"> It was a long poem of six or seven hundred lines, and it was a fantastic, amazing, unearthly thing. </span>
      <span id="f6561"> It was terrific, impossible; and yet there it was, scrawled in black ink across the sheets of paper. </span>
      <span id="f6562"> It dealt with man and his soul-gropings in their ultimate terms, plumbing the abysses of space for the testimony of remotest suns and rainbow spectrums. </span>
      <span id="f6563"> It was a mad orgy of imagination, wassailing in the skull of a dying man who half sobbed under his breath and was quick with the wild flutter of fading heart-beats. </span>
      <span id="f6564"> The poem swung in majestic rhythm to the cool tumult of interstellar conflict, to the onset of starry hosts, to the impact of cold suns and the flaming up of nebulae in the darkened void; and through it all, unceasing and faint, like a silver shuttle, ran the frail, piping voice of man, a querulous chirp amid the screaming of planets and the crash of systems.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6565">&#34;There is nothing like it in literature,&#34; Martin said, when at last he was able to speak. </span>
      <span id="f6566"> &#34;It&#39;s wonderful!--wonderful! </span>
      <span id="f6567"> It has gone to my head. </span>
      <span id="f6568">I am drunken with it. </span>
      <span id="f6569"> That great, infinitesimal question--I can&#39;t shake it out of my thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f6570"> That questing, eternal, ever recurring, thin little wailing voice of man is still ringing in my ears. </span>
      <span id="f6571"> It is like the dead-march of a gnat amid the trumpeting of elephants and the roaring of lions. </span>
      <span id="f6572"> It is insatiable with microscopic desire. </span>
      <span id="f6573"> I now I&#39;m making a fool of myself, but the thing has obsessed me. </span>
      <span id="f6574"> You are--I don&#39;t know what you are--you are wonderful, that&#39;s all. </span>
      <span id="f6575"> But how do you do it? </span>
      <span id="f6576"> How do you do it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6577">Martin paused from his rhapsody, only to break out afresh.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6578">&#34;I shall never write again. </span>
      <span id="f6579"> I am a dauber in clay. </span>
      <span id="f6580"> You have shown me the work of the real artificer-artisan. </span>
      <span id="f6581"> Genius! </span>
      <span id="f6582"> This is something more than genius. </span>
      <span id="f6583"> It transcends genius. </span>
      <span id="f6584"> It is truth gone mad. </span>
      <span id="f6585"> It is true, man, every line of it. </span>
      <span id="f6586"> I wonder if you realize that, you dogmatist. </span>
      <span id="f6587">Science cannot give you the lie. </span>
      <span id="f6588"> It is the truth of the sneer, stamped out from the black iron of the Cosmos and interwoven with mighty rhythms of sound into a fabric of splendor and beauty. </span>
      <span id="f6589"> And now I won&#39;t say another word. </span>
      <span id="f6590"> I am overwhelmed, crushed. </span>
      <span id="f6591"> Yes, I will, too. </span>
      <span id="f6592"> Let me market it for you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6593">Brissenden grinned. </span>
      <span id="f6594"> &#34;There&#39;s not a magazine in Christendom that would dare to publish it--you know that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6595">&#34;I know nothing of the sort. </span>
      <span id="f6596"> I know there&#39;s not a magazine in Christendom that wouldn&#39;t jump at it. </span>
      <span id="f6597"> They don&#39;t get things like that every day. </span>
      <span id="f6598"> That&#39;s no mere poem of the year. </span>
      <span id="f6599"> It&#39;s the poem of the century.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6600">&#34;I&#39;d like to take you up on the proposition.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6601">&#34;Now don&#39;t get cynical,&#34; Martin exhorted. </span>
      <span id="f6602"> &#34;The magazine editors are not wholly fatuous. </span>
      <span id="f6603"> I know that. </span>
      <span id="f6604"> And I&#39;ll close with you on the bet. </span>
      <span id="f6605"> I&#39;ll wager anything you want that &#39;Ephemera&#39; is accepted either on the first or second offering.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6606">&#34;There&#39;s just one thing that prevents me from taking you.&#34;  Brissenden waited a moment. </span>
      <span id="f6607"> &#34;The thing is big--the biggest I&#39;ve ever done. </span>
      <span id="f6608"> I know that. </span>
      <span id="f6609"> It&#39;s my swan song. </span>
      <span id="f6610"> I am almighty proud of it. </span>
      <span id="f6611"> I worship it. </span>
      <span id="f6612"> It&#39;s better than whiskey. </span>
      <span id="f6613"> It is what I dreamed of--the great and perfect thing--when I was a simple young man, with sweet illusions and clean ideals. </span>
      <span id="f6614"> And I&#39;ve got it, now, in my last grasp, and I&#39;ll not have it pawed over and soiled by a lot of swine. </span>
      <span id="f6615"> No, I won&#39;t take the bet. </span>
      <span id="f6616"> It&#39;s mine. </span>
      <span id="f6617"> I made it, and I&#39;ve shared it with you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6618">&#34;But think of the rest of the world,&#34; Martin protested. </span>
      <span id="f6619"> &#34;The function of beauty is joy-making.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6620">&#34;It&#39;s my beauty.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6621">&#34;Don&#39;t be selfish.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6622">&#34;I&#39;m not selfish.&#34;  Brissenden grinned soberly in the way he had when pleased by the thing his thin lips were about to shape. </span>
      <span id="f6623"> &#34;I&#39;m as unselfish as a famished hog.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6624">In vain Martin strove to shake him from his decision. </span>
      <span id="f6625"> Martin told him that his hatred of the magazines was rabid, fanatical, and that his conduct was a thousand times more despicable than that of the youth who burned the temple of Diana at Ephesus. </span>
      <span id="f6626"> Under the storm of denunciation Brissenden complacently sipped his toddy and affirmed that everything the other said was quite true, with the exception of the magazine editors. </span>
      <span id="f6627">His hatred of them knew no bounds, and he excelled Martin in denunciation when he turned upon them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6628">&#34;I wish you&#39;d type it for me,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f6629"> &#34;You know how a thousand times better than any stenographer. </span>
      <span id="f6630"> And now I want to give you some advice.&#34; He drew a bulky manuscript from his outside coat pocket. </span>
      <span id="f6631"> &#34;Here&#39;s your &#39;Shame of the Sun.&#39;  I&#39;ve read it not once, but twice and three times--the highest compliment I can pay you. </span>
      <span id="f6632"> After what you&#39;ve said about &#39;Ephemera&#39; I must be silent. </span>
      <span id="f6633"> But this I will say: when &#39;The Shame of the Sun&#39; is published, it will make a hit. </span>
      <span id="f6634"> It will start a controversy that will be worth thousands to you just in advertising.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6635">Martin laughed. </span>
      <span id="f6636"> &#34;I suppose your next advice will be to submit it to the magazines.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6637">&#34;By all means no--that is, if you want to see it in print. </span>
      <span id="f6638"> Offer it to the first-class houses. </span>
      <span id="f6639"> Some publisher&#39;s reader may be mad enough or drunk enough to report favorably on it. </span>
      <span id="f6640"> You&#39;ve read the books. </span>
      <span id="f6641"> The meat of them has been transmuted in the alembic of Martin Eden&#39;s mind and poured into &#39;The Shame of the Sun,&#39; and one day Martin Eden will be famous, and not the least of his fame will rest upon that work. </span>
      <span id="f6642"> So you must get a publisher for it--the sooner the better.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6643">Brissenden went home late that night; and just as he mounted the first step of the car, he swung suddenly back on Martin and thrust into his hand a small, tightly crumpled wad of paper.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6644">&#34;Here, take this,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f6645"> &#34;I was out to the races to-day, and I had the right dope.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6646">The bell clanged and the car pulled out, leaving Martin wondering as to the nature of the crinkly, greasy wad he clutched in his hand. </span>
      <span id="f6647"> Back in his room he unrolled it and found a hundred-dollar bill.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6648">He did not scruple to use it. </span>
      <span id="f6649"> He knew his friend had always plenty of money, and he knew also, with profound certitude, that his success would enable him to repay it. </span>
      <span id="f6650"> In the morning he paid every bill, gave Maria three months&#39; advance on the room, and redeemed every pledge at the pawnshop. </span>
      <span id="f6651"> Next he bought Marian&#39;s wedding present, and simpler presents, suitable to Christmas, for Ruth and Gertrude. </span>
      <span id="f6652"> And finally, on the balance remaining to him, he herded the whole Silva tribe down into Oakland. </span>
      <span id="f6653"> He was a winter late in redeeming his promise, but redeemed it was, for the last, least Silva got a pair of shoes, as well as Maria herself. </span>
      <span id="f6654"> Also, there were horns, and dolls, and toys of various sorts, and parcels and bundles of candies and nuts that filled the arms of all the Silvas to overflowing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6655">It was with this extraordinary procession trooping at his and Maria&#39;s heels into a confectioner&#39;s in quest if the biggest candy-cane ever made, that he encountered Ruth and her mother. </span>
      <span id="f6656"> Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f6657">Morse was shocked. </span>
      <span id="f6658"> Even Ruth was hurt, for she had some regard for appearances, and her lover, cheek by jowl with Maria, at the head of that army of Portuguese ragamuffins, was not a pretty sight. </span>
      <span id="f6659"> But it was not that which hurt so much as what she took to be his lack of pride and self-respect. </span>
      <span id="f6660"> Further, and keenest of all, she read into the incident the impossibility of his living down his working-class origin. </span>
      <span id="f6661"> There was stigma enough in the fact of it, but shamelessly to flaunt it in the face of the world--her world--was going too far. </span>
      <span id="f6662"> Though her engagement to Martin had been kept secret, their long intimacy had not been unproductive of gossip; and in the shop, glancing covertly at her lover and his following, had been several of her acquaintances. </span>
      <span id="f6663"> She lacked the easy largeness of Martin and could not rise superior to her environment. </span>
      <span id="f6664"> She had been hurt to the quick, and her sensitive nature was quivering with the shame of it. </span>
      <span id="f6665"> So it was, when Martin arrived later in the day, that he kept her present in his breast-pocket, deferring the giving of it to a more propitious occasion. </span>
      <span id="f6666"> Ruth in tears--passionate, angry tears--was a revelation to him. </span>
      <span id="f6667"> The spectacle of her suffering convinced him that he had been a brute, yet in the soul of him he could not see how nor why. </span>
      <span id="f6668"> It never entered his head to be ashamed of those he knew, and to take the Silvas out to a Christmas treat could in no way, so it seemed to him, show lack of consideration for Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f6669"> On the other hand, he did see Ruth&#39;s point of view, after she had explained it; and he looked upon it as a feminine weakness, such as afflicted all women and the best of women.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>