<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XXXVI</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f6670">CHAPTER XXXVI</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f6671">&#34;Come on,--I&#39;ll show you the real dirt,&#34; Brissenden said to him, one evening in January.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6672">They had dined together in San Francisco, and were at the Ferry Building, returning to Oakland, when the whim came to him to show Martin the &#34;real dirt.&#34;  He turned and fled across the water-front, a meagre shadow in a flapping overcoat, with Martin straining to keep up with him. </span>
      <span id="f6673"> At a wholesale liquor store he bought two gallon-demijohns of old port, and with one in each hand boarded a Mission Street car, Martin at his heels burdened with several quart-bottles of whiskey.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6674">If Ruth could see me now, was his thought, while he wondered as to what constituted the real dirt.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6675">&#34;Maybe nobody will be there,&#34; Brissenden said, when they dismounted and plunged off to the right into the heart of the working-class ghetto, south of Market Street. </span>
      <span id="f6676"> &#34;In which case you&#39;ll miss what you&#39;ve been looking for so long.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6677">&#34;And what the deuce is that?&#34; Martin asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6678">&#34;Men, intelligent men, and not the gibbering nonentities I found you consorting with in that trader&#39;s den. </span>
      <span id="f6679"> You read the books and you found yourself all alone. </span>
      <span id="f6680"> Well, I&#39;m going to show you to-night some other men who&#39;ve read the books, so that you won&#39;t be lonely any more.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6681">&#34;Not that I bother my head about their everlasting discussions,&#34; he said at the end of a block. </span>
      <span id="f6682"> &#34;I&#39;m not interested in book philosophy. </span>
      <span id="f6683"> But you&#39;ll find these fellows intelligences and not bourgeois swine. </span>
      <span id="f6684"> But watch out, they&#39;ll talk an arm off of you on any subject under the sun.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6685">&#34;Hope Norton&#39;s there,&#34; he panted a little later, resisting Martin&#39;s effort to relieve him of the two demijohns. </span>
      <span id="f6686"> &#34;Norton&#39;s an idealist--a Harvard man. </span>
      <span id="f6687"> Prodigious memory. </span>
      <span id="f6688"> Idealism led him to philosophic anarchy, and his family threw him off. </span>
      <span id="f6689"> Father&#39;s a railroad president and many times millionnaire, but the son&#39;s starving in &#39;Frisco, editing an anarchist sheet for twenty-five a month.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6690">Martin was little acquainted in San Francisco, and not at all south of Market; so he had no idea of where he was being led.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6691">&#34;Go ahead,&#34; he said; &#34;tell me about them beforehand. </span>
      <span id="f6692"> What do they do for a living? </span>
      <span id="f6693"> How do they happen to be here?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6694">&#34;Hope Hamilton&#39;s there.&#34;  Brissenden paused and rested his hands. </span>
      <span id="f6695"> &#34;Strawn- Hamilton&#39;s his name--hyphenated, you know--comes of old Southern stock. </span>
      <span id="f6696">He&#39;s a tramp--laziest man I ever knew, though he&#39;s clerking, or trying to, in a socialist cooperative store for six dollars a week. </span>
      <span id="f6697"> But he&#39;s a confirmed hobo. </span>
      <span id="f6698"> Tramped into town. </span>
      <span id="f6699"> I&#39;ve seen him sit all day on a bench and never a bite pass his lips, and in the evening, when I invited him to dinner--restaurant two blocks away--have him say, &#39;Too much trouble, old man. </span>
      <span id="f6700"> Buy me a package of cigarettes instead.&#39;  He was a Spencerian like you till Kreis turned him to materialistic monism. </span>
      <span id="f6701"> I&#39;ll start him on monism if I can. </span>
      <span id="f6702"> Norton&#39;s another monist--only he affirms naught but spirit. </span>
      <span id="f6703"> He can give Kreis and Hamilton all they want, too.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6704">&#34;Who is Kreis?&#34; Martin asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6705">&#34;His rooms we&#39;re going to. </span>
      <span id="f6706"> One time professor--fired from university--usual story. </span>
      <span id="f6707"> A mind like a steel trap. </span>
      <span id="f6708"> Makes his living any old way. </span>
      <span id="f6709"> I know he&#39;s been a street fakir when he was down. </span>
      <span id="f6710"> Unscrupulous. </span>
      <span id="f6711">Rob a corpse of a shroud--anything. </span>
      <span id="f6712"> Difference between him--and the bourgeoisie is that he robs without illusion. </span>
      <span id="f6713"> He&#39;ll talk Nietzsche, or Schopenhauer, or Kant, or anything, but the only thing in this world, not excepting Mary, that he really cares for, is his monism. </span>
      <span id="f6714"> Haeckel is his little tin god. </span>
      <span id="f6715"> The only way to insult him is to take a slap at Haeckel.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6716">&#34;Here&#39;s the hang-out.&#34;  Brissenden rested his demijohn at the upstairs entrance, preliminary to the climb. </span>
      <span id="f6717"> It was the usual two-story corner building, with a saloon and grocery underneath. </span>
      <span id="f6718"> &#34;The gang lives here--got the whole upstairs to themselves. </span>
      <span id="f6719"> But Kreis is the only one who has two rooms. </span>
      <span id="f6720"> Come on.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6721">No lights burned in the upper hall, but Brissenden threaded the utter blackness like a familiar ghost. </span>
      <span id="f6722"> He stopped to speak to Martin.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6723">&#34;There&#39;s one fellow--Stevens--a theosophist. </span>
      <span id="f6724"> Makes a pretty tangle when he gets going. </span>
      <span id="f6725"> Just now he&#39;s dish-washer in a restaurant. </span>
      <span id="f6726"> Likes a good cigar. </span>
      <span id="f6727"> I&#39;ve seen him eat in a ten-cent hash-house and pay fifty cents for the cigar he smoked afterward. </span>
      <span id="f6728"> I&#39;ve got a couple in my pocket for him, if he shows up.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6729">&#34;And there&#39;s another fellow--Parry--an Australian, a statistician and a sporting encyclopaedia. </span>
      <span id="f6730"> Ask him the grain output of Paraguay for 1903, or the English importation of sheetings into China for 1890, or at what weight Jimmy Britt fought Battling Nelson, or who was welter-weight champion of the United States in &#39;68, and you&#39;ll get the correct answer with the automatic celerity of a slot-machine. </span>
      <span id="f6731"> And there&#39;s Andy, a stone- mason, has ideas on everything, a good chess-player; and another fellow, Harry, a baker, red hot socialist and strong union man. </span>
      <span id="f6732"> By the way, you remember Cooks&#39; and Waiters&#39; strike--Hamilton was the chap who organized that union and precipitated the strike--planned it all out in advance, right here in Kreis&#39;s rooms. </span>
      <span id="f6733"> Did it just for the fun of it, but was too lazy to stay by the union. </span>
      <span id="f6734"> Yet he could have risen high if he wanted to. </span>
      <span id="f6735">There&#39;s no end to the possibilities in that man--if he weren&#39;t so insuperably lazy.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6736">Brissenden advanced through the darkness till a thread of light marked the threshold of a door. </span>
      <span id="f6737"> A knock and an answer opened it, and Martin found himself shaking hands with Kreis, a handsome brunette man, with dazzling white teeth, a drooping black mustache, and large, flashing black eyes. </span>
      <span id="f6738"> Mary, a matronly young blonde, was washing dishes in the little back room that served for kitchen and dining room. </span>
      <span id="f6739"> The front room served as bedchamber and living room. </span>
      <span id="f6740"> Overhead was the week&#39;s washing, hanging in festoons so low that Martin did not see at first the two men talking in a corner. </span>
      <span id="f6741"> They hailed Brissenden and his demijohns with acclamation, and, on being introduced, Martin learned they were Andy and Parry. </span>
      <span id="f6742"> He joined them and listened attentively to the description of a prize-fight Parry had seen the night before; while Brissenden, in his glory, plunged into the manufacture of a toddy and the serving of wine and whiskey-and-sodas. </span>
      <span id="f6743"> At his command, &#34;Bring in the clan,&#34; Andy departed to go the round of the rooms for the lodgers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6744">&#34;We&#39;re lucky that most of them are here,&#34; Brissenden whispered to Martin. </span>
      <span id="f6745">&#34;There&#39;s Norton and Hamilton; come on and meet them. </span>
      <span id="f6746"> Stevens isn&#39;t around, I hear. </span>
      <span id="f6747"> I&#39;m going to get them started on monism if I can. </span>
      <span id="f6748"> Wait till they get a few jolts in them and they&#39;ll warm up.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6749">At first the conversation was desultory. </span>
      <span id="f6750"> Nevertheless Martin could not fail to appreciate the keen play of their minds. </span>
      <span id="f6751"> They were men with opinions, though the opinions often clashed, and, though they were witty and clever, they were not superficial. </span>
      <span id="f6752"> He swiftly saw, no matter upon what they talked, that each man applied the correlation of knowledge and had also a deep-seated and unified conception of society and the Cosmos. </span>
      <span id="f6753">Nobody manufactured their opinions for them; they were all rebels of one variety or another, and their lips were strangers to platitudes. </span>
      <span id="f6754"> Never had Martin, at the Morses&#39;, heard so amazing a range of topics discussed. </span>
      <span id="f6755">There seemed no limit save time to the things they were alive to. </span>
      <span id="f6756"> The talk wandered from Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f6757">Humphry Ward&#39;s new book to Shaw&#39;s latest play, through the future of the drama to reminiscences of Mansfield. </span>
      <span id="f6758"> They appreciated or sneered at the morning editorials, jumped from labor conditions in New Zealand to Henry James and Brander Matthews, passed on to the German designs in the Far East and the economic aspect of the Yellow Peril, wrangled over the German elections and Bebel&#39;s last speech, and settled down to local politics, the latest plans and scandals in the union labor party administration, and the wires that were pulled to bring about the Coast Seamen&#39;s strike. </span>
      <span id="f6759"> Martin was struck by the inside knowledge they possessed. </span>
      <span id="f6760"> They knew what was never printed in the newspapers--the wires and strings and the hidden hands that made the puppets dance. </span>
      <span id="f6761"> To Martin&#39;s surprise, the girl, Mary, joined in the conversation, displaying an intelligence he had never encountered in the few women he had met. </span>
      <span id="f6762"> They talked together on Swinburne and Rossetti, after which she led him beyond his depth into the by-paths of French literature. </span>
      <span id="f6763"> His revenge came when she defended Maeterlinck and he brought into action the carefully-thought-out thesis of &#34;The Shame of the Sun.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6764">Several other men had dropped in, and the air was thick with tobacco smoke, when Brissenden waved the red flag.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6765">&#34;Here&#39;s fresh meat for your axe, Kreis,&#34; he said; &#34;a rose-white youth with the ardor of a lover for Herbert Spencer. </span>
      <span id="f6766"> Make a Haeckelite of him--if you can.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6767">Kreis seemed to wake up and flash like some metallic, magnetic thing, while Norton looked at Martin sympathetically, with a sweet, girlish smile, as much as to say that he would be amply protected.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6768">Kreis began directly on Martin, but step by step Norton interfered, until he and Kreis were off and away in a personal battle. </span>
      <span id="f6769"> Martin listened and fain would have rubbed his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f6770"> It was impossible that this should be, much less in the labor ghetto south of Market. </span>
      <span id="f6771"> The books were alive in these men. </span>
      <span id="f6772"> They talked with fire and enthusiasm, the intellectual stimulant stirring them as he had seen drink and anger stir other men. </span>
      <span id="f6773">What he heard was no longer the philosophy of the dry, printed word, written by half-mythical demigods like Kant and Spencer. </span>
      <span id="f6774"> It was living philosophy, with warm, red blood, incarnated in these two men till its very features worked with excitement. </span>
      <span id="f6775"> Now and again other men joined in, and all followed the discussion with cigarettes going out in their hands and with alert, intent faces.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6776">Idealism had never attracted Martin, but the exposition it now received at the hands of Norton was a revelation. </span>
      <span id="f6777"> The logical plausibility of it, that made an appeal to his intellect, seemed missed by Kreis and Hamilton, who sneered at Norton as a metaphysician, and who, in turn, sneered back at them as metaphysicians. </span>
      <span id="f6778"> Phenomenon and noumenon were bandied back and forth. </span>
      <span id="f6779"> They charged him with attempting to explain consciousness by itself. </span>
      <span id="f6780"> He charged them with word-jugglery, with reasoning from words to theory instead of from facts to theory. </span>
      <span id="f6781"> At this they were aghast. </span>
      <span id="f6782"> It was the cardinal tenet of their mode of reasoning to start with facts and to give names to the facts.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6783">When Norton wandered into the intricacies of Kant, Kreis reminded him that all good little German philosophies when they died went to Oxford. </span>
      <span id="f6784"> A little later Norton reminded them of Hamilton&#39;s Law of Parsimony, the application of which they immediately claimed for every reasoning process of theirs. </span>
      <span id="f6785"> And Martin hugged his knees and exulted in it all. </span>
      <span id="f6786"> But Norton was no Spencerian, and he, too, strove for Martin&#39;s philosophic soul, talking as much at him as to his two opponents.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6787">&#34;You know Berkeley has never been answered,&#34; he said, looking directly at Martin. </span>
      <span id="f6788"> &#34;Herbert Spencer came the nearest, which was not very near. </span>
      <span id="f6789"> Even the stanchest of Spencer&#39;s followers will not go farther. </span>
      <span id="f6790"> I was reading an essay of Saleeby&#39;s the other day, and the best Saleeby could say was that Herbert Spencer _nearly_ succeeded in answering Berkeley.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6791">&#34;You know what Hume said?&#34; Hamilton asked. </span>
      <span id="f6792"> Norton nodded, but Hamilton gave it for the benefit of the rest. </span>
      <span id="f6793"> &#34;He said that Berkeley&#39;s arguments admit of no answer and produce no conviction.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6794">&#34;In his, Hume&#39;s, mind,&#34; was the reply. </span>
      <span id="f6795"> &#34;And Hume&#39;s mind was the same as yours, with this difference: he was wise enough to admit there was no answering Berkeley.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6796">Norton was sensitive and excitable, though he never lost his head, while Kreis and Hamilton were like a pair of cold-blooded savages, seeking out tender places to prod and poke. </span>
      <span id="f6797"> As the evening grew late, Norton, smarting under the repeated charges of being a metaphysician, clutching his chair to keep from jumping to his feet, his gray eyes snapping and his girlish face grown harsh and sure, made a grand attack upon their position.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6798">&#34;All right, you Haeckelites, I may reason like a medicine man, but, pray, how do you reason? </span>
      <span id="f6799"> You have nothing to stand on, you unscientific dogmatists with your positive science which you are always lugging about into places it has no right to be. </span>
      <span id="f6800"> Long before the school of materialistic monism arose, the ground was removed so that there could be no foundation. </span>
      <span id="f6801"> Locke was the man, John Locke. </span>
      <span id="f6802"> Two hundred years ago--more than that, even in his &#39;Essay concerning the Human Understanding,&#39; he proved the non-existence of innate ideas. </span>
      <span id="f6803"> The best of it is that that is precisely what you claim. </span>
      <span id="f6804"> To-night, again and again, you have asserted the non-existence of innate ideas.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6805">&#34;And what does that mean? </span>
      <span id="f6806"> It means that you can never know ultimate reality. </span>
      <span id="f6807"> Your brains are empty when you are born. </span>
      <span id="f6808"> Appearances, or phenomena, are all the content your minds can receive from your five senses. </span>
      <span id="f6809"> Then noumena, which are not in your minds when you are born, have no way of getting in--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6810">&#34;I deny--&#34; Kreis started to interrupt.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6811">&#34;You wait till I&#39;m done,&#34; Norton shouted. </span>
      <span id="f6812"> &#34;You can know only that much of the play and interplay of force and matter as impinges in one way or another on our senses. </span>
      <span id="f6813"> You see, I am willing to admit, for the sake of the argument, that matter exists; and what I am about to do is to efface you by your own argument. </span>
      <span id="f6814"> I can&#39;t do it any other way, for you are both congenitally unable to understand a philosophic abstraction.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6815">&#34;And now, what do you know of matter, according to your own positive science? </span>
      <span id="f6816"> You know it only by its phenomena, its appearances. </span>
      <span id="f6817"> You are aware only of its changes, or of such changes in it as cause changes in your consciousness. </span>
      <span id="f6818"> Positive science deals only with phenomena, yet you are foolish enough to strive to be ontologists and to deal with noumena. </span>
      <span id="f6819">Yet, by the very definition of positive science, science is concerned only with appearances. </span>
      <span id="f6820"> As somebody has said, phenomenal knowledge cannot transcend phenomena.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6821">&#34;You cannot answer Berkeley, even if you have annihilated Kant, and yet, perforce, you assume that Berkeley is wrong when you affirm that science proves the non-existence of God, or, as much to the point, the existence of matter.--You know I granted the reality of matter only in order to make myself intelligible to your understanding. </span>
      <span id="f6822"> Be positive scientists, if you please; but ontology has no place in positive science, so leave it alone. </span>
      <span id="f6823"> Spencer is right in his agnosticism, but if Spencer--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6824">But it was time to catch the last ferry-boat for Oakland, and Brissenden and Martin slipped out, leaving Norton still talking and Kreis and Hamilton waiting to pounce on him like a pair of hounds as soon as he finished.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6825">&#34;You have given me a glimpse of fairyland,&#34; Martin said on the ferry-boat. </span>
      <span id="f6826"> &#34;It makes life worth while to meet people like that. </span>
      <span id="f6827"> My mind is all worked up. </span>
      <span id="f6828"> I never appreciated idealism before. </span>
      <span id="f6829"> Yet I can&#39;t accept it. </span>
      <span id="f6830"> I know that I shall always be a realist. </span>
      <span id="f6831"> I am so made, I guess. </span>
      <span id="f6832"> But I&#39;d like to have made a reply to Kreis and Hamilton, and I think I&#39;d have had a word or two for Norton. </span>
      <span id="f6833"> I didn&#39;t see that Spencer was damaged any. </span>
      <span id="f6834"> I&#39;m as excited as a child on its first visit to the circus. </span>
      <span id="f6835"> I see I must read up some more. </span>
      <span id="f6836"> I&#39;m going to get hold of Saleeby. </span>
      <span id="f6837"> I still think Spencer is unassailable, and next time I&#39;m going to take a hand myself.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6838">But Brissenden, breathing painfully, had dropped off to sleep, his chin buried in a scarf and resting on his sunken chest, his body wrapped in the long overcoat and shaking to the vibration of the propellers.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>