<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f6839">CHAPTER XXXVII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f6840">The first thing Martin did next morning was to go counter both to Brissenden&#39;s advice and command. </span>
      <span id="f6841"> &#34;The Shame of the Sun&#34; he wrapped and mailed to The Acropolis. </span>
      <span id="f6842"> He believed he could find magazine publication for it, and he felt that recognition by the magazines would commend him to the book-publishing houses. </span>
      <span id="f6843"> &#34;Ephemera&#34; he likewise wrapped and mailed to a magazine. </span>
      <span id="f6844"> Despite Brissenden&#39;s prejudice against the magazines, which was a pronounced mania with him, Martin decided that the great poem should see print. </span>
      <span id="f6845"> He did not intend, however, to publish it without the other&#39;s permission. </span>
      <span id="f6846"> His plan was to get it accepted by one of the high magazines, and, thus armed, again to wrestle with Brissenden for consent.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6847">Martin began, that morning, a story which he had sketched out a number of weeks before and which ever since had been worrying him with its insistent clamor to be created. </span>
      <span id="f6848"> Apparently it was to be a rattling sea story, a tale of twentieth-century adventure and romance, handling real characters, in a real world, under real conditions. </span>
      <span id="f6849"> But beneath the swing and go of the story was to be something else--something that the superficial reader would never discern and which, on the other hand, would not diminish in any way the interest and enjoyment for such a reader. </span>
      <span id="f6850"> It was this, and not the mere story, that impelled Martin to write it. </span>
      <span id="f6851"> For that matter, it was always the great, universal motif that suggested plots to him. </span>
      <span id="f6852"> After having found such a motif, he cast about for the particular persons and particular location in time and space wherewith and wherein to utter the universal thing. </span>
      <span id="f6853"> &#34;Overdue&#34; was the title he had decided for it, and its length he believed would not be more than sixty thousand words--a bagatelle for him with his splendid vigor of production. </span>
      <span id="f6854"> On this first day he took hold of it with conscious delight in the mastery of his tools. </span>
      <span id="f6855"> He no longer worried for fear that the sharp, cutting edges should slip and mar his work. </span>
      <span id="f6856"> The long months of intense application and study had brought their reward. </span>
      <span id="f6857"> He could now devote himself with sure hand to the larger phases of the thing he shaped; and as he worked, hour after hour, he felt, as never before, the sure and cosmic grasp with which he held life and the affairs of life. </span>
      <span id="f6858">&#34;Overdue&#34; would tell a story that would be true of its particular characters and its particular events; but it would tell, too, he was confident, great vital things that would be true of all time, and all sea, and all life--thanks to Herbert Spencer, he thought, leaning back for a moment from the table. </span>
      <span id="f6859"> Ay, thanks to Herbert Spencer and to the master-key of life, evolution, which Spencer had placed in his hands.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6860">He was conscious that it was great stuff he was writing. </span>
      <span id="f6861"> &#34;It will go! </span>
      <span id="f6862"> It will go!&#34; was the refrain that kept, sounding in his ears. </span>
      <span id="f6863"> Of course it would go. </span>
      <span id="f6864"> At last he was turning out the thing at which the magazines would jump. </span>
      <span id="f6865"> The whole story worked out before him in lightning flashes. </span>
      <span id="f6866">He broke off from it long enough to write a paragraph in his note-book. </span>
      <span id="f6867">This would be the last paragraph in &#34;Overdue&#34;; but so thoroughly was the whole book already composed in his brain that he could write, weeks before he had arrived at the end, the end itself. </span>
      <span id="f6868"> He compared the tale, as yet unwritten, with the tales of the sea-writers, and he felt it to be immeasurably superior. </span>
      <span id="f6869"> &#34;There&#39;s only one man who could touch it,&#34; he murmured aloud, &#34;and that&#39;s Conrad. </span>
      <span id="f6870"> And it ought to make even him sit up and shake hands with me, and say, &#39;Well done, Martin, my boy.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6871">He toiled on all day, recollecting, at the last moment, that he was to have dinner at the Morses&#39;. </span>
      <span id="f6872"> Thanks to Brissenden, his black suit was out of pawn and he was again eligible for dinner parties. </span>
      <span id="f6873"> Down town he stopped off long enough to run into the library and search for Saleeby&#39;s books. </span>
      <span id="f6874"> He drew out &#34;The Cycle of Life,&#34; and on the car turned to the essay Norton had mentioned on Spencer. </span>
      <span id="f6875"> As Martin read, he grew angry. </span>
      <span id="f6876">His face flushed, his jaw set, and unconsciously his hand clenched, unclenched, and clenched again as if he were taking fresh grips upon some hateful thing out of which he was squeezing the life. </span>
      <span id="f6877"> When he left the car, he strode along the sidewalk as a wrathful man will stride, and he rang the Morse bell with such viciousness that it roused him to consciousness of his condition, so that he entered in good nature, smiling with amusement at himself. </span>
      <span id="f6878"> No sooner, however, was he inside than a great depression descended upon him. </span>
      <span id="f6879"> He fell from the height where he had been up-borne all day on the wings of inspiration. </span>
      <span id="f6880">&#34;Bourgeois,&#34; &#34;trader&#39;s den&#34;--Brissenden&#39;s epithets repeated themselves in his mind. </span>
      <span id="f6881"> But what of that? </span>
      <span id="f6882">he demanded angrily. </span>
      <span id="f6883"> He was marrying Ruth, not her family.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6884">It seemed to him that he had never seen Ruth more beautiful, more spiritual and ethereal and at the same time more healthy. </span>
      <span id="f6885"> There was color in her cheeks, and her eyes drew him again and again--the eyes in which he had first read immortality. </span>
      <span id="f6886"> He had forgotten immortality of late, and the trend of his scientific reading had been away from it; but here, in Ruth&#39;s eyes, he read an argument without words that transcended all worded arguments. </span>
      <span id="f6887"> He saw that in her eyes before which all discussion fled away, for he saw love there. </span>
      <span id="f6888"> And in his own eyes was love; and love was unanswerable. </span>
      <span id="f6889"> Such was his passionate doctrine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6890">The half hour he had with her, before they went in to dinner, left him supremely happy and supremely satisfied with life. </span>
      <span id="f6891"> Nevertheless, at table, the inevitable reaction and exhaustion consequent upon the hard day seized hold of him. </span>
      <span id="f6892"> He was aware that his eyes were tired and that he was irritable. </span>
      <span id="f6893"> He remembered it was at this table, at which he now sneered and was so often bored, that he had first eaten with civilized beings in what he had imagined was an atmosphere of high culture and refinement. </span>
      <span id="f6894"> He caught a glimpse of that pathetic figure of him, so long ago, a self-conscious savage, sprouting sweat at every pore in an agony of apprehension, puzzled by the bewildering minutiae of eating-implements, tortured by the ogre of a servant, striving at a leap to live at such dizzy social altitude, and deciding in the end to be frankly himself, pretending no knowledge and no polish he did not possess.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6895">He glanced at Ruth for reassurance, much in the same manner that a passenger, with sudden panic thought of possible shipwreck, will strive to locate the life preservers. </span>
      <span id="f6896"> Well, that much had come out of it--love and Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f6897"> All the rest had failed to stand the test of the books. </span>
      <span id="f6898"> But Ruth and love had stood the test; for them he found a biological sanction. </span>
      <span id="f6899"> Love was the most exalted expression of life. </span>
      <span id="f6900"> Nature had been busy designing him, as she had been busy with all normal men, for the purpose of loving. </span>
      <span id="f6901"> She had spent ten thousand centuries--ay, a hundred thousand and a million centuries--upon the task, and he was the best she could do. </span>
      <span id="f6902"> She had made love the strongest thing in him, increased its power a myriad per cent with her gift of imagination, and sent him forth into the ephemera to thrill and melt and mate. </span>
      <span id="f6903"> His hand sought Ruth&#39;s hand beside him hidden by the table, and a warm pressure was given and received. </span>
      <span id="f6904"> She looked at him a swift instant, and her eyes were radiant and melting. </span>
      <span id="f6905"> So were his in the thrill that pervaded him; nor did he realize how much that was radiant and melting in her eyes had been aroused by what she had seen in his.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6906">Across the table from him, cater-cornered, at Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6907">Morse&#39;s right, sat Judge Blount, a local superior court judge. </span>
      <span id="f6908"> Martin had met him a number of times and had failed to like him. </span>
      <span id="f6909"> He and Ruth&#39;s father were discussing labor union politics, the local situation, and socialism, and Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6910">Morse was endeavoring to twit Martin on the latter topic. </span>
      <span id="f6911"> At last Judge Blount looked across the table with benignant and fatherly pity. </span>
      <span id="f6912">Martin smiled to himself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6913">&#34;You&#39;ll grow out of it, young man,&#34; he said soothingly. </span>
      <span id="f6914"> &#34;Time is the best cure for such youthful distempers.&#34;  He turned to Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6915">Morse. </span>
      <span id="f6916"> &#34;I do not believe discussion is good in such cases. </span>
      <span id="f6917"> It makes the patient obstinate.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6918">&#34;That is true,&#34; the other assented gravely. </span>
      <span id="f6919"> &#34;But it is well to warn the patient occasionally of his condition.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6920">Martin laughed merrily, but it was with an effort. </span>
      <span id="f6921"> The day had been too long, the day&#39;s effort too intense, and he was deep in the throes of the reaction.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6922">&#34;Undoubtedly you are both excellent doctors,&#34; he said; &#34;but if you care a whit for the opinion of the patient, let him tell you that you are poor diagnosticians. </span>
      <span id="f6923"> In fact, you are both suffering from the disease you think you find in me. </span>
      <span id="f6924"> As for me, I am immune. </span>
      <span id="f6925"> The socialist philosophy that riots half-baked in your veins has passed me by.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6926">&#34;Clever, clever,&#34; murmured the judge. </span>
      <span id="f6927"> &#34;An excellent ruse in controversy, to reverse positions.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6928">&#34;Out of your mouth.&#34;  Martin&#39;s eyes were sparkling, but he kept control of himself. </span>
      <span id="f6929"> &#34;You see, Judge, I&#39;ve heard your campaign speeches. </span>
      <span id="f6930"> By some henidical process--henidical, by the way is a favorite word of mine which nobody understands--by some henidical process you persuade yourself that you believe in the competitive system and the survival of the strong, and at the same time you indorse with might and main all sorts of measures to shear the strength from the strong.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6931">&#34;My young man--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6932">&#34;Remember, I&#39;ve heard your campaign speeches,&#34; Martin warned. </span>
      <span id="f6933"> &#34;It&#39;s on record, your position on interstate commerce regulation, on regulation of the railway trust and Standard Oil, on the conservation of the forests, on a thousand and one restrictive measures that are nothing else than socialistic.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6934">&#34;Do you mean to tell me that you do not believe in regulating these various outrageous exercises of power?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6935">&#34;That&#39;s not the point. </span>
      <span id="f6936"> I mean to tell you that you are a poor diagnostician. </span>
      <span id="f6937"> I mean to tell you that I am not suffering from the microbe of socialism. </span>
      <span id="f6938"> I mean to tell you that it is you who are suffering from the emasculating ravages of that same microbe. </span>
      <span id="f6939"> As for me, I am an inveterate opponent of socialism just as I am an inveterate opponent of your own mongrel democracy that is nothing else than pseudo- socialism masquerading under a garb of words that will not stand the test of the dictionary.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6940">&#34;I am a reactionary--so complete a reactionary that my position is incomprehensible to you who live in a veiled lie of social organization and whose sight is not keen enough to pierce the veil. </span>
      <span id="f6941"> You make believe that you believe in the survival of the strong and the rule of the strong. </span>
      <span id="f6942"> I believe. </span>
      <span id="f6943"> That is the difference. </span>
      <span id="f6944"> When I was a trifle younger,--a few months younger,--I believed the same thing. </span>
      <span id="f6945"> You see, the ideas of you and yours had impressed me. </span>
      <span id="f6946"> But merchants and traders are cowardly rulers at best; they grunt and grub all their days in the trough of money-getting, and I have swung back to aristocracy, if you please. </span>
      <span id="f6947"> I am the only individualist in this room. </span>
      <span id="f6948"> I look to the state for nothing. </span>
      <span id="f6949">I look only to the strong man, the man on horseback, to save the state from its own rotten futility.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6950">&#34;Nietzsche was right. </span>
      <span id="f6951"> I won&#39;t take the time to tell you who Nietzsche was, but he was right. </span>
      <span id="f6952"> The world belongs to the strong--to the strong who are noble as well and who do not wallow in the swine-trough of trade and exchange. </span>
      <span id="f6953"> The world belongs to the true nobleman, to the great blond beasts, to the noncompromisers, to the &#39;yes-sayers.&#39;  And they will eat you up, you socialists--who are afraid of socialism and who think yourselves individualists. </span>
      <span id="f6954"> Your slave-morality of the meek and lowly will never save you.--Oh, it&#39;s all Greek, I know, and I won&#39;t bother you any more with it. </span>
      <span id="f6955"> But remember one thing. </span>
      <span id="f6956"> There aren&#39;t half a dozen individualists in Oakland, but Martin Eden is one of them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6957">He signified that he was done with the discussion, and turned to Ruth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6958">&#34;I&#39;m wrought up to-day,&#34; he said in an undertone. </span>
      <span id="f6959"> &#34;All I want to do is to love, not talk.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6960">He ignored Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6961">Morse, who said:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6962">&#34;I am unconvinced. </span>
      <span id="f6963"> All socialists are Jesuits. </span>
      <span id="f6964"> That is the way to tell them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6965">&#34;We&#39;ll make a good Republican out of you yet,&#34; said Judge Blount.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6966">&#34;The man on horseback will arrive before that time,&#34; Martin retorted with good humor, and returned to Ruth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6967">But Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6968">Morse was not content. </span>
      <span id="f6969"> He did not like the laziness and the disinclination for sober, legitimate work of this prospective son-in-law of his, for whose ideas he had no respect and of whose nature he had no understanding. </span>
      <span id="f6970"> So he turned the conversation to Herbert Spencer. </span>
      <span id="f6971"> Judge Blount ably seconded him, and Martin, whose ears had pricked at the first mention of the philosopher&#39;s name, listened to the judge enunciate a grave and complacent diatribe against Spencer. </span>
      <span id="f6972"> From time to time Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6973">Morse glanced at Martin, as much as to say, &#34;There, my boy, you see.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6974">&#34;Chattering daws,&#34; Martin muttered under his breath, and went on talking with Ruth and Arthur.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6975">But the long day and the &#34;real dirt&#34; of the night before were telling upon him; and, besides, still in his burnt mind was what had made him angry when he read it on the car.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6976">&#34;What is the matter?&#34; Ruth asked suddenly alarmed by the effort he was making to contain himself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6977">&#34;There is no god but the Unknowable, and Herbert Spencer is its prophet,&#34; Judge Blount was saying at that moment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6978">Martin turned upon him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6979">&#34;A cheap judgment,&#34; he remarked quietly. </span>
      <span id="f6980"> &#34;I heard it first in the City Hall Park, on the lips of a workingman who ought to have known better. </span>
      <span id="f6981"> I have heard it often since, and each time the clap-trap of it nauseates me. </span>
      <span id="f6982"> You ought to be ashamed of yourself. </span>
      <span id="f6983"> To hear that great and noble man&#39;s name upon your lips is like finding a dew-drop in a cesspool. </span>
      <span id="f6984"> You are disgusting.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6985">It was like a thunderbolt. </span>
      <span id="f6986"> Judge Blount glared at him with apoplectic countenance, and silence reigned. </span>
      <span id="f6987"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6988">Morse was secretly pleased. </span>
      <span id="f6989"> He could see that his daughter was shocked. </span>
      <span id="f6990"> It was what he wanted to do--to bring out the innate ruffianism of this man he did not like.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6991">Ruth&#39;s hand sought Martin&#39;s beseechingly under the table, but his blood was up. </span>
      <span id="f6992"> He was inflamed by the intellectual pretence and fraud of those who sat in the high places. </span>
      <span id="f6993"> A Superior Court Judge! </span>
      <span id="f6994"> It was only several years before that he had looked up from the mire at such glorious entities and deemed them gods.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6995">Judge Blount recovered himself and attempted to go on, addressing himself to Martin with an assumption of politeness that the latter understood was for the benefit of the ladies. </span>
      <span id="f6996"> Even this added to his anger. </span>
      <span id="f6997"> Was there no honesty in the world?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6998">&#34;You can&#39;t discuss Spencer with me,&#34; he cried. </span>
      <span id="f6999"> &#34;You do not know any more about Spencer than do his own countrymen. </span>
      <span id="f7000"> But it is no fault of yours, I grant. </span>
      <span id="f7001"> It is just a phase of the contemptible ignorance of the times. </span>
      <span id="f7002"> I ran across a sample of it on my way here this evening. </span>
      <span id="f7003"> I was reading an essay by Saleeby on Spencer. </span>
      <span id="f7004"> You should read it. </span>
      <span id="f7005"> It is accessible to all men. </span>
      <span id="f7006"> You can buy it in any book-store or draw it from the public library. </span>
      <span id="f7007"> You would feel ashamed of your paucity of abuse and ignorance of that noble man compared with what Saleeby has collected on the subject. </span>
      <span id="f7008"> It is a record of shame that would shame your shame.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7009">&#34;&#39;The philosopher of the half-educated,&#39; he was called by an academic Philosopher who was not worthy to pollute the atmosphere he breathed. </span>
      <span id="f7010"> I don&#39;t think you have read ten pages of Spencer, but there have been critics, assumably more intelligent than you, who have read no more than you of Spencer, who publicly challenged his followers to adduce one single idea from all his writings--from Herbert Spencer&#39;s writings, the man who has impressed the stamp of his genius over the whole field of scientific research and modern thought; the father of psychology; the man who revolutionized pedagogy, so that to-day the child of the French peasant is taught the three R&#39;s according to principles laid down by him. </span>
      <span id="f7011">And the little gnats of men sting his memory when they get their very bread and butter from the technical application of his ideas. </span>
      <span id="f7012"> What little of worth resides in their brains is largely due to him. </span>
      <span id="f7013"> It is certain that had he never lived, most of what is correct in their parrot- learned knowledge would be absent.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7014">&#34;And yet a man like Principal Fairbanks of Oxford--a man who sits in an even higher place than you, Judge Blount--has said that Spencer will be dismissed by posterity as a poet and dreamer rather than a thinker. </span>
      <span id="f7015">Yappers and blatherskites, the whole brood of them! </span>
      <span id="f7016"> &#39;&#34;First Principles&#34; is not wholly destitute of a certain literary power,&#39; said one of them. </span>
      <span id="f7017">And others of them have said that he was an industrious plodder rather than an original thinker. </span>
      <span id="f7018"> Yappers and blatherskites! </span>
      <span id="f7019"> Yappers and blatherskites!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7020">Martin ceased abruptly, in a dead silence. </span>
      <span id="f7021"> Everybody in Ruth&#39;s family looked up to Judge Blount as a man of power and achievement, and they were horrified at Martin&#39;s outbreak. </span>
      <span id="f7022"> The remainder of the dinner passed like a funeral, the judge and Mr. </span>
      <span id="f7023">Morse confining their talk to each other, and the rest of the conversation being extremely desultory. </span>
      <span id="f7024"> Then afterward, when Ruth and Martin were alone, there was a scene.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7025">&#34;You are unbearable,&#34; she wept.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7026">But his anger still smouldered, and he kept muttering, &#34;The beasts! </span>
      <span id="f7027"> The beasts!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7028">When she averred he had insulted the judge, he retorted:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7029">&#34;By telling the truth about him?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7030">&#34;I don&#39;t care whether it was true or not,&#34; she insisted. </span>
      <span id="f7031"> &#34;There are certain bounds of decency, and you had no license to insult anybody.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7032">&#34;Then where did Judge Blount get the license to assault truth?&#34; Martin demanded. </span>
      <span id="f7033"> &#34;Surely to assault truth is a more serious misdemeanor than to insult a pygmy personality such as the judge&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f7034"> He did worse than that. </span>
      <span id="f7035">He blackened the name of a great, noble man who is dead. </span>
      <span id="f7036"> Oh, the beasts! </span>
      <span id="f7037">The beasts!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7038">His complex anger flamed afresh, and Ruth was in terror of him. </span>
      <span id="f7039"> Never had she seen him so angry, and it was all mystified and unreasonable to her comprehension. </span>
      <span id="f7040"> And yet, through her very terror ran the fibres of fascination that had drawn and that still drew her to him--that had compelled her to lean towards him, and, in that mad, culminating moment, lay her hands upon his neck. </span>
      <span id="f7041"> She was hurt and outraged by what had taken place, and yet she lay in his arms and quivered while he went on muttering, &#34;The beasts! </span>
      <span id="f7042"> The beasts!&#34;  And she still lay there when he said: &#34;I&#39;ll not bother your table again, dear. </span>
      <span id="f7043"> They do not like me, and it is wrong of me to thrust my objectionable presence upon them. </span>
      <span id="f7044"> Besides, they are just as objectionable to me. </span>
      <span id="f7045"> Faugh! </span>
      <span id="f7046"> They are sickening. </span>
      <span id="f7047"> And to think of it, I dreamed in my innocence that the persons who sat in the high places, who lived in fine houses and had educations and bank accounts, were worth while!&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>