<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f7048">CHAPTER XXXVIII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f7049">&#34;Come on, let&#39;s go down to the local.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7050">So spoke Brissenden, faint from a hemorrhage of half an hour before--the second hemorrhage in three days. </span>
      <span id="f7051"> The perennial whiskey glass was in his hands, and he drained it with shaking fingers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7052">&#34;What do I want with socialism?&#34; Martin demanded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7053">&#34;Outsiders are allowed five-minute speeches,&#34; the sick man urged. </span>
      <span id="f7054"> &#34;Get up and spout. </span>
      <span id="f7055"> Tell them why you don&#39;t want socialism. </span>
      <span id="f7056"> Tell them what you think about them and their ghetto ethics. </span>
      <span id="f7057"> Slam Nietzsche into them and get walloped for your pains. </span>
      <span id="f7058"> Make a scrap of it. </span>
      <span id="f7059"> It will do them good. </span>
      <span id="f7060"> Discussion is what they want, and what you want, too. </span>
      <span id="f7061"> You see, I&#39;d like to see you a socialist before I&#39;m gone. </span>
      <span id="f7062"> It will give you a sanction for your existence. </span>
      <span id="f7063"> It is the one thing that will save you in the time of disappointment that is coming to you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7064">&#34;I never can puzzle out why you, of all men, are a socialist,&#34; Martin pondered. </span>
      <span id="f7065"> &#34;You detest the crowd so. </span>
      <span id="f7066"> Surely there is nothing in the canaille to recommend it to your aesthetic soul.&#34;  He pointed an accusing finger at the whiskey glass which the other was refilling. </span>
      <span id="f7067"> &#34;Socialism doesn&#39;t seem to save you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7068">&#34;I&#39;m very sick,&#34; was the answer. </span>
      <span id="f7069"> &#34;With you it is different. </span>
      <span id="f7070"> You have health and much to live for, and you must be handcuffed to life somehow. </span>
      <span id="f7071">As for me, you wonder why I am a socialist. </span>
      <span id="f7072"> I&#39;ll tell you. </span>
      <span id="f7073"> It is because Socialism is inevitable; because the present rotten and irrational system cannot endure; because the day is past for your man on horseback. </span>
      <span id="f7074"> The slaves won&#39;t stand for it. </span>
      <span id="f7075"> They are too many, and willy- nilly they&#39;ll drag down the would-be equestrian before ever he gets astride. </span>
      <span id="f7076"> You can&#39;t get away from them, and you&#39;ll have to swallow the whole slave-morality. </span>
      <span id="f7077"> It&#39;s not a nice mess, I&#39;ll allow. </span>
      <span id="f7078"> But it&#39;s been a- brewing and swallow it you must. </span>
      <span id="f7079"> You are antediluvian anyway, with your Nietzsche ideas. </span>
      <span id="f7080"> The past is past, and the man who says history repeats itself is a liar. </span>
      <span id="f7081"> Of course I don&#39;t like the crowd, but what&#39;s a poor chap to do? </span>
      <span id="f7082"> We can&#39;t have the man on horseback, and anything is preferable to the timid swine that now rule. </span>
      <span id="f7083"> But come on, anyway. </span>
      <span id="f7084"> I&#39;m loaded to the guards now, and if I sit here any longer, I&#39;ll get drunk. </span>
      <span id="f7085">And you know the doctor says--damn the doctor! </span>
      <span id="f7086"> I&#39;ll fool him yet.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7087">It was Sunday night, and they found the small hall packed by the Oakland socialists, chiefly members of the working class. </span>
      <span id="f7088"> The speaker, a clever Jew, won Martin&#39;s admiration at the same time that he aroused his antagonism. </span>
      <span id="f7089"> The man&#39;s stooped and narrow shoulders and weazened chest proclaimed him the true child of the crowded ghetto, and strong on Martin was the age-long struggle of the feeble, wretched slaves against the lordly handful of men who had ruled over them and would rule over them to the end of time. </span>
      <span id="f7090"> To Martin this withered wisp of a creature was a symbol. </span>
      <span id="f7091"> He was the figure that stood forth representative of the whole miserable mass of weaklings and inefficients who perished according to biological law on the ragged confines of life. </span>
      <span id="f7092"> They were the unfit. </span>
      <span id="f7093"> In spite of their cunning philosophy and of their antlike proclivities for cooperation, Nature rejected them for the exceptional man. </span>
      <span id="f7094"> Out of the plentiful spawn of life she flung from her prolific hand she selected only the best. </span>
      <span id="f7095"> It was by the same method that men, aping her, bred race- horses and cucumbers. </span>
      <span id="f7096"> Doubtless, a creator of a Cosmos could have devised a better method; but creatures of this particular Cosmos must put up with this particular method. </span>
      <span id="f7097"> Of course, they could squirm as they perished, as the socialists squirmed, as the speaker on the platform and the perspiring crowd were squirming even now as they counselled together for some new device with which to minimize the penalties of living and outwit the Cosmos.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7098">So Martin thought, and so he spoke when Brissenden urged him to give them hell. </span>
      <span id="f7099"> He obeyed the mandate, walking up to the platform, as was the custom, and addressing the chairman. </span>
      <span id="f7100"> He began in a low voice, haltingly, forming into order the ideas which had surged in his brain while the Jew was speaking. </span>
      <span id="f7101"> In such meetings five minutes was the time allotted to each speaker; but when Martin&#39;s five minutes were up, he was in full stride, his attack upon their doctrines but half completed. </span>
      <span id="f7102"> He had caught their interest, and the audience urged the chairman by acclamation to extend Martin&#39;s time. </span>
      <span id="f7103"> They appreciated him as a foeman worthy of their intellect, and they listened intently, following every word. </span>
      <span id="f7104"> He spoke with fire and conviction, mincing no words in his attack upon the slaves and their morality and tactics and frankly alluding to his hearers as the slaves in question. </span>
      <span id="f7105"> He quoted Spencer and Malthus, and enunciated the biological law of development.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7106">&#34;And so,&#34; he concluded, in a swift resume, &#34;no state composed of the slave-types can endure. </span>
      <span id="f7107"> The old law of development still holds. </span>
      <span id="f7108"> In the struggle for existence, as I have shown, the strong and the progeny of the strong tend to survive, while the weak and the progeny of the weak are crushed and tend to perish. </span>
      <span id="f7109"> The result is that the strong and the progeny of the strong survive, and, so long as the struggle obtains, the strength of each generation increases. </span>
      <span id="f7110"> That is development. </span>
      <span id="f7111"> But you slaves--it is too bad to be slaves, I grant--but you slaves dream of a society where the law of development will be annulled, where no weaklings and inefficients will perish, where every inefficient will have as much as he wants to eat as many times a day as he desires, and where all will marry and have progeny--the weak as well as the strong. </span>
      <span id="f7112"> What will be the result? </span>
      <span id="f7113"> No longer will the strength and life-value of each generation increase. </span>
      <span id="f7114"> On the contrary, it will diminish. </span>
      <span id="f7115"> There is the Nemesis of your slave philosophy. </span>
      <span id="f7116"> Your society of slaves--of, by, and for, slaves--must inevitably weaken and go to pieces as the life which composes it weakens and goes to pieces.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7117">&#34;Remember, I am enunciating biology and not sentimental ethics. </span>
      <span id="f7118"> No state of slaves can stand--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7119">&#34;How about the United States?&#34; a man yelled from the audience.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7120">&#34;And how about it?&#34; Martin retorted. </span>
      <span id="f7121"> &#34;The thirteen colonies threw off their rulers and formed the Republic so-called. </span>
      <span id="f7122"> The slaves were their own masters. </span>
      <span id="f7123"> There were no more masters of the sword. </span>
      <span id="f7124"> But you couldn&#39;t get along without masters of some sort, and there arose a new set of masters--not the great, virile, noble men, but the shrewd and spidery traders and money-lenders. </span>
      <span id="f7125"> And they enslaved you over again--but not frankly, as the true, noble men would do with weight of their own right arms, but secretly, by spidery machinations and by wheedling and cajolery and lies. </span>
      <span id="f7126"> They have purchased your slave judges, they have debauched your slave legislatures, and they have forced to worse horrors than chattel slavery your slave boys and girls. </span>
      <span id="f7127"> Two million of your children are toiling to-day in this trader-oligarchy of the United States. </span>
      <span id="f7128"> Ten millions of you slaves are not properly sheltered nor properly fed.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7129">&#34;But to return. </span>
      <span id="f7130"> I have shown that no society of slaves can endure, because, in its very nature, such society must annul the law of development. </span>
      <span id="f7131"> No sooner can a slave society be organized than deterioration sets in. </span>
      <span id="f7132"> It is easy for you to talk of annulling the law of development, but where is the new law of development that will maintain your strength? </span>
      <span id="f7133"> Formulate it. </span>
      <span id="f7134"> Is it already formulated? </span>
      <span id="f7135"> Then state it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7136">Martin took his seat amidst an uproar of voices. </span>
      <span id="f7137"> A score of men were on their feet clamoring for recognition from the chair. </span>
      <span id="f7138"> And one by one, encouraged by vociferous applause, speaking with fire and enthusiasm and excited gestures, they replied to the attack. </span>
      <span id="f7139"> It was a wild night--but it was wild intellectually, a battle of ideas. </span>
      <span id="f7140"> Some strayed from the point, but most of the speakers replied directly to Martin. </span>
      <span id="f7141"> They shook him with lines of thought that were new to him; and gave him insights, not into new biological laws, but into new applications of the old laws. </span>
      <span id="f7142">They were too earnest to be always polite, and more than once the chairman rapped and pounded for order.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7143">It chanced that a cub reporter sat in the audience, detailed there on a day dull of news and impressed by the urgent need of journalism for sensation. </span>
      <span id="f7144"> He was not a bright cub reporter. </span>
      <span id="f7145"> He was merely facile and glib. </span>
      <span id="f7146"> He was too dense to follow the discussion. </span>
      <span id="f7147"> In fact, he had a comfortable feeling that he was vastly superior to these wordy maniacs of the working class. </span>
      <span id="f7148"> Also, he had a great respect for those who sat in the high places and dictated the policies of nations and newspapers. </span>
      <span id="f7149"> Further, he had an ideal, namely, of achieving that excellence of the perfect reporter who is able to make something--even a great deal--out of nothing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7150">He did not know what all the talk was about. </span>
      <span id="f7151"> It was not necessary. </span>
      <span id="f7152"> Words like _revolution_ gave him his cue. </span>
      <span id="f7153"> Like a paleontologist, able to reconstruct an entire skeleton from one fossil bone, he was able to reconstruct a whole speech from the one word _revolution_. </span>
      <span id="f7154"> He did it that night, and he did it well; and since Martin had made the biggest stir, he put it all into his mouth and made him the arch-anarch of the show, transforming his reactionary individualism into the most lurid, red- shirt socialist utterance. </span>
      <span id="f7155"> The cub reporter was an artist, and it was a large brush with which he laid on the local color--wild-eyed long-haired men, neurasthenic and degenerate types of men, voices shaken with passion, clenched fists raised on high, and all projected against a background of oaths, yells, and the throaty rumbling of angry men.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>