<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f7156">CHAPTER XXXIX</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f7157">Over the coffee, in his little room, Martin read next morning&#39;s paper. </span>
      <span id="f7158"> It was a novel experience to find himself head-lined, on the first page at that; and he was surprised to learn that he was the most notorious leader of the Oakland socialists. </span>
      <span id="f7159"> He ran over the violent speech the cub reporter had constructed for him, and, though at first he was angered by the fabrication, in the end he tossed the paper aside with a laugh.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7160">&#34;Either the man was drunk or criminally malicious,&#34; he said that afternoon, from his perch on the bed, when Brissenden had arrived and dropped limply into the one chair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7161">&#34;But what do you care?&#34; Brissenden asked. </span>
      <span id="f7162"> &#34;Surely you don&#39;t desire the approval of the bourgeois swine that read the newspapers?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7163">Martin thought for a while, then said:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7164">&#34;No, I really don&#39;t care for their approval, not a whit. </span>
      <span id="f7165"> On the other hand, it&#39;s very likely to make my relations with Ruth&#39;s family a trifle awkward. </span>
      <span id="f7166"> Her father always contended I was a socialist, and this miserable stuff will clinch his belief. </span>
      <span id="f7167"> Not that I care for his opinion--but what&#39;s the odds? </span>
      <span id="f7168"> I want to read you what I&#39;ve been doing to- day. </span>
      <span id="f7169"> It&#39;s &#39;Overdue,&#39; of course, and I&#39;m just about halfway through.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7170">He was reading aloud when Maria thrust open the door and ushered in a young man in a natty suit who glanced briskly about him, noting the oil- burner and the kitchen in the corner before his gaze wandered on to Martin.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7171">&#34;Sit down,&#34; Brissenden said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7172">Martin made room for the young man on the bed and waited for him to broach his business.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7173">&#34;I heard you speak last night, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f7174">Eden, and I&#39;ve come to interview you,&#34; he began.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7175">Brissenden burst out in a hearty laugh.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7176">&#34;A brother socialist?&#34; the reporter asked, with a quick glance at Brissenden that appraised the color-value of that cadaverous and dying man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7177">&#34;And he wrote that report,&#34; Martin said softly. </span>
      <span id="f7178"> &#34;Why, he is only a boy!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7179">&#34;Why don&#39;t you poke him?&#34; Brissenden asked. </span>
      <span id="f7180"> &#34;I&#39;d give a thousand dollars to have my lungs back for five minutes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7181">The cub reporter was a trifle perplexed by this talking over him and around him and at him. </span>
      <span id="f7182"> But he had been commended for his brilliant description of the socialist meeting and had further been detailed to get a personal interview with Martin Eden, the leader of the organized menace to society.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7183">&#34;You do not object to having your picture taken, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f7184">Eden?&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f7185">&#34;I&#39;ve a staff photographer outside, you see, and he says it will be better to take you right away before the sun gets lower. </span>
      <span id="f7186"> Then we can have the interview afterward.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7187">&#34;A photographer,&#34; Brissenden said meditatively. </span>
      <span id="f7188"> &#34;Poke him, Martin! </span>
      <span id="f7189"> Poke him!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7190">&#34;I guess I&#39;m getting old,&#34; was the answer. </span>
      <span id="f7191"> &#34;I know I ought, but I really haven&#39;t the heart. </span>
      <span id="f7192"> It doesn&#39;t seem to matter.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7193">&#34;For his mother&#39;s sake,&#34; Brissenden urged.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7194">&#34;It&#39;s worth considering,&#34; Martin replied; &#34;but it doesn&#39;t seem worth while enough to rouse sufficient energy in me. </span>
      <span id="f7195"> You see, it does take energy to give a fellow a poking. </span>
      <span id="f7196"> Besides, what does it matter?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7197">&#34;That&#39;s right--that&#39;s the way to take it,&#34; the cub announced airily, though he had already begun to glance anxiously at the door.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7198">&#34;But it wasn&#39;t true, not a word of what he wrote,&#34; Martin went on, confining his attention to Brissenden.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7199">&#34;It was just in a general way a description, you understand,&#34; the cub ventured, &#34;and besides, it&#39;s good advertising. </span>
      <span id="f7200"> That&#39;s what counts. </span>
      <span id="f7201"> It was a favor to you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7202">&#34;It&#39;s good advertising, Martin, old boy,&#34; Brissenden repeated solemnly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7203">&#34;And it was a favor to me--think of that!&#34; was Martin&#39;s contribution.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7204">&#34;Let me see--where were you born, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f7205">Eden?&#34; the cub asked, assuming an air of expectant attention.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7206">&#34;He doesn&#39;t take notes,&#34; said Brissenden. </span>
      <span id="f7207"> &#34;He remembers it all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7208">&#34;That is sufficient for me.&#34;  The cub was trying not to look worried. </span>
      <span id="f7209"> &#34;No decent reporter needs to bother with notes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7210">&#34;That was sufficient--for last night.&#34;  But Brissenden was not a disciple of quietism, and he changed his attitude abruptly. </span>
      <span id="f7211"> &#34;Martin, if you don&#39;t poke him, I&#39;ll do it myself, if I fall dead on the floor the next moment.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7212">&#34;How will a spanking do?&#34; Martin asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7213">Brissenden considered judicially, and nodded his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7214">The next instant Martin was seated on the edge of the bed with the cub face downward across his knees.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7215">&#34;Now don&#39;t bite,&#34; Martin warned, &#34;or else I&#39;ll have to punch your face. </span>
      <span id="f7216">It would be a pity, for it is such a pretty face.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7217">His uplifted hand descended, and thereafter rose and fell in a swift and steady rhythm. </span>
      <span id="f7218"> The cub struggled and cursed and squirmed, but did not offer to bite. </span>
      <span id="f7219"> Brissenden looked on gravely, though once he grew excited and gripped the whiskey bottle, pleading, &#34;Here, just let me swat him once.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7220">&#34;Sorry my hand played out,&#34; Martin said, when at last he desisted. </span>
      <span id="f7221"> &#34;It is quite numb.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7222">He uprighted the cub and perched him on the bed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7223">&#34;I&#39;ll have you arrested for this,&#34; he snarled, tears of boyish indignation running down his flushed cheeks. </span>
      <span id="f7224"> &#34;I&#39;ll make you sweat for this. </span>
      <span id="f7225"> You&#39;ll see.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7226">&#34;The pretty thing,&#34; Martin remarked. </span>
      <span id="f7227"> &#34;He doesn&#39;t realize that he has entered upon the downward path. </span>
      <span id="f7228"> It is not honest, it is not square, it is not manly, to tell lies about one&#39;s fellow-creatures the way he has done, and he doesn&#39;t know it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7229">&#34;He has to come to us to be told,&#34; Brissenden filled in a pause.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7230">&#34;Yes, to me whom he has maligned and injured. </span>
      <span id="f7231"> My grocery will undoubtedly refuse me credit now. </span>
      <span id="f7232"> The worst of it is that the poor boy will keep on this way until he deteriorates into a first-class newspaper man and also a first-class scoundrel.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7233">&#34;But there is yet time,&#34; quoth Brissenden. </span>
      <span id="f7234"> &#34;Who knows but what you may prove the humble instrument to save him. </span>
      <span id="f7235"> Why didn&#39;t you let me swat him just once? </span>
      <span id="f7236"> I&#39;d like to have had a hand in it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7237">&#34;I&#39;ll have you arrested, the pair of you, you b-b-big brutes,&#34; sobbed the erring soul.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7238">&#34;No, his mouth is too pretty and too weak.&#34;  Martin shook his head lugubriously. </span>
      <span id="f7239"> &#34;I&#39;m afraid I&#39;ve numbed my hand in vain. </span>
      <span id="f7240"> The young man cannot reform. </span>
      <span id="f7241"> He will become eventually a very great and successful newspaper man. </span>
      <span id="f7242"> He has no conscience. </span>
      <span id="f7243"> That alone will make him great.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7244">With that the cub passed out the door in trepidation to the last for fear that Brissenden would hit him in the back with the bottle he still clutched.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7245">In the next morning&#39;s paper Martin learned a great deal more about himself that was new to him. </span>
      <span id="f7246"> &#34;We are the sworn enemies of society,&#34; he found himself quoted as saying in a column interview. </span>
      <span id="f7247"> &#34;No, we are not anarchists but socialists.&#34;  When the reporter pointed out to him that there seemed little difference between the two schools, Martin had shrugged his shoulders in silent affirmation. </span>
      <span id="f7248"> His face was described as bilaterally asymmetrical, and various other signs of degeneration were described. </span>
      <span id="f7249"> Especially notable were his thuglike hands and the fiery gleams in his blood-shot eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7250">He learned, also, that he spoke nightly to the workmen in the City Hall Park, and that among the anarchists and agitators that there inflamed the minds of the people he drew the largest audiences and made the most revolutionary speeches. </span>
      <span id="f7251"> The cub painted a high-light picture of his poor little room, its oil-stove and the one chair, and of the death&#39;s-head tramp who kept him company and who looked as if he had just emerged from twenty years of solitary confinement in some fortress dungeon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7252">The cub had been industrious. </span>
      <span id="f7253"> He had scurried around and nosed out Martin&#39;s family history, and procured a photograph of Higginbotham&#39;s Cash Store with Bernard Higginbotham himself standing out in front. </span>
      <span id="f7254"> That gentleman was depicted as an intelligent, dignified businessman who had no patience with his brother-in-law&#39;s socialistic views, and no patience with the brother-in-law, either, whom he was quoted as characterizing as a lazy good-for-nothing who wouldn&#39;t take a job when it was offered to him and who would go to jail yet. </span>
      <span id="f7255"> Hermann Von Schmidt, Marian&#39;s husband, had likewise been interviewed. </span>
      <span id="f7256"> He had called Martin the black sheep of the family and repudiated him. </span>
      <span id="f7257"> &#34;He tried to sponge off of me, but I put a stop to that good and quick,&#34; Von Schmidt had said to the reporter. </span>
      <span id="f7258"> &#34;He knows better than to come bumming around here. </span>
      <span id="f7259"> A man who won&#39;t work is no good, take that from me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7260">This time Martin was genuinely angry. </span>
      <span id="f7261"> Brissenden looked upon the affair as a good joke, but he could not console Martin, who knew that it would be no easy task to explain to Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f7262"> As for her father, he knew that he must be overjoyed with what had happened and that he would make the most of it to break off the engagement. </span>
      <span id="f7263"> How much he would make of it he was soon to realize. </span>
      <span id="f7264"> The afternoon mail brought a letter from Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f7265"> Martin opened it with a premonition of disaster, and read it standing at the open door when he had received it from the postman. </span>
      <span id="f7266"> As he read, mechanically his hand sought his pocket for the tobacco and brown paper of his old cigarette days. </span>
      <span id="f7267"> He was not aware that the pocket was empty or that he had even reached for the materials with which to roll a cigarette.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7268">It was not a passionate letter. </span>
      <span id="f7269"> There were no touches of anger in it. </span>
      <span id="f7270">But all the way through, from the first sentence to the last, was sounded the note of hurt and disappointment. </span>
      <span id="f7271"> She had expected better of him. </span>
      <span id="f7272"> She had thought he had got over his youthful wildness, that her love for him had been sufficiently worth while to enable him to live seriously and decently. </span>
      <span id="f7273"> And now her father and mother had taken a firm stand and commanded that the engagement be broken. </span>
      <span id="f7274"> That they were justified in this she could not but admit. </span>
      <span id="f7275"> Their relation could never be a happy one. </span>
      <span id="f7276">It had been unfortunate from the first. </span>
      <span id="f7277"> But one regret she voiced in the whole letter, and it was a bitter one to Martin. </span>
      <span id="f7278"> &#34;If only you had settled down to some position and attempted to make something of yourself,&#34; she wrote. </span>
      <span id="f7279"> &#34;But it was not to be. </span>
      <span id="f7280"> Your past life had been too wild and irregular. </span>
      <span id="f7281"> I can understand that you are not to be blamed. </span>
      <span id="f7282">You could act only according to your nature and your early training. </span>
      <span id="f7283"> So I do not blame you, Martin. </span>
      <span id="f7284"> Please remember that. </span>
      <span id="f7285"> It was simply a mistake. </span>
      <span id="f7286"> As father and mother have contended, we were not made for each other, and we should both be happy because it was discovered not too late.&#34; . </span>
      <span id="f7287">. </span>
      <span id="f7288">&#34;There is no use trying to see me,&#34; she said toward the last. </span>
      <span id="f7289">&#34;It would be an unhappy meeting for both of us, as well as for my mother. </span>
      <span id="f7290">I feel, as it is, that I have caused her great pain and worry. </span>
      <span id="f7291"> I shall have to do much living to atone for it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7292">He read it through to the end, carefully, a second time, then sat down and replied. </span>
      <span id="f7293"> He outlined the remarks he had uttered at the socialist meeting, pointing out that they were in all ways the converse of what the newspaper had put in his mouth. </span>
      <span id="f7294"> Toward the end of the letter he was God&#39;s own lover pleading passionately for love. </span>
      <span id="f7295"> &#34;Please answer,&#34; he said, &#34;and in your answer you have to tell me but one thing. </span>
      <span id="f7296"> Do you love me? </span>
      <span id="f7297"> That is all--the answer to that one question.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7298">But no answer came the next day, nor the next. </span>
      <span id="f7299"> &#34;Overdue&#34; lay untouched upon the table, and each day the heap of returned manuscripts under the table grew larger. </span>
      <span id="f7300"> For the first time Martin&#39;s glorious sleep was interrupted by insomnia, and he tossed through long, restless nights. </span>
      <span id="f7301">Three times he called at the Morse home, but was turned away by the servant who answered the bell. </span>
      <span id="f7302"> Brissenden lay sick in his hotel, too feeble to stir out, and, though Martin was with him often, he did not worry him with his troubles.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7303">For Martin&#39;s troubles were many. </span>
      <span id="f7304"> The aftermath of the cub reporter&#39;s deed was even wider than Martin had anticipated. </span>
      <span id="f7305"> The Portuguese grocer refused him further credit, while the greengrocer, who was an American and proud of it, had called him a traitor to his country and refused further dealings with him--carrying his patriotism to such a degree that he cancelled Martin&#39;s account and forbade him ever to attempt to pay it. </span>
      <span id="f7306">The talk in the neighborhood reflected the same feeling, and indignation against Martin ran high. </span>
      <span id="f7307"> No one would have anything to do with a socialist traitor. </span>
      <span id="f7308"> Poor Maria was dubious and frightened, but she remained loyal. </span>
      <span id="f7309"> The children of the neighborhood recovered from the awe of the grand carriage which once had visited Martin, and from safe distances they called him &#34;hobo&#34; and &#34;bum.&#34;  The Silva tribe, however, stanchly defended him, fighting more than one pitched battle for his honor, and black eyes and bloody noses became quite the order of the day and added to Maria&#39;s perplexities and troubles.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7310">Once, Martin met Gertrude on the street, down in Oakland, and learned what he knew could not be otherwise--that Bernard Higginbotham was furious with him for having dragged the family into public disgrace, and that he had forbidden him the house.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7311">&#34;Why don&#39;t you go away, Martin?&#34; Gertrude had begged. </span>
      <span id="f7312"> &#34;Go away and get a job somewhere and steady down. </span>
      <span id="f7313"> Afterwards, when this all blows over, you can come back.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7314">Martin shook his head, but gave no explanations. </span>
      <span id="f7315"> How could he explain? </span>
      <span id="f7316">He was appalled at the awful intellectual chasm that yawned between him and his people. </span>
      <span id="f7317"> He could never cross it and explain to them his position,--the Nietzschean position, in regard to socialism. </span>
      <span id="f7318"> There were not words enough in the English language, nor in any language, to make his attitude and conduct intelligible to them. </span>
      <span id="f7319"> Their highest concept of right conduct, in his case, was to get a job. </span>
      <span id="f7320"> That was their first word and their last. </span>
      <span id="f7321"> It constituted their whole lexicon of ideas. </span>
      <span id="f7322"> Get a job! </span>
      <span id="f7323">Go to work! </span>
      <span id="f7324"> Poor, stupid slaves, he thought, while his sister talked. </span>
      <span id="f7325">Small wonder the world belonged to the strong. </span>
      <span id="f7326"> The slaves were obsessed by their own slavery. </span>
      <span id="f7327"> A job was to them a golden fetich before which they fell down and worshipped.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7328">He shook his head again, when Gertrude offered him money, though he knew that within the day he would have to make a trip to the pawnbroker.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7329">&#34;Don&#39;t come near Bernard now,&#34; she admonished him. </span>
      <span id="f7330"> &#34;After a few months, when he is cooled down, if you want to, you can get the job of drivin&#39; delivery-wagon for him. </span>
      <span id="f7331"> Any time you want me, just send for me an&#39; I&#39;ll come. </span>
      <span id="f7332"> Don&#39;t forget.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7333">She went away weeping audibly, and he felt a pang of sorrow shoot through him at sight of her heavy body and uncouth gait. </span>
      <span id="f7334"> As he watched her go, the Nietzschean edifice seemed to shake and totter. </span>
      <span id="f7335"> The slave-class in the abstract was all very well, but it was not wholly satisfactory when it was brought home to his own family. </span>
      <span id="f7336"> And yet, if there was ever a slave trampled by the strong, that slave was his sister Gertrude. </span>
      <span id="f7337"> He grinned savagely at the paradox. </span>
      <span id="f7338"> A fine Nietzsche-man he was, to allow his intellectual concepts to be shaken by the first sentiment or emotion that strayed along--ay, to be shaken by the slave-morality itself, for that was what his pity for his sister really was. </span>
      <span id="f7339"> The true noble men were above pity and compassion. </span>
      <span id="f7340"> Pity and compassion had been generated in the subterranean barracoons of the slaves and were no more than the agony and sweat of the crowded miserables and weaklings.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>