<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f7341">CHAPTER XL</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f7342">&#34;Overdue&#34; still continued to lie forgotten on the table. </span>
      <span id="f7343"> Every manuscript that he had had out now lay under the table. </span>
      <span id="f7344"> Only one manuscript he kept going, and that was Brissenden&#39;s &#34;Ephemera.&#34;  His bicycle and black suit were again in pawn, and the type-writer people were once more worrying about the rent. </span>
      <span id="f7345"> But such things no longer bothered him. </span>
      <span id="f7346"> He was seeking a new orientation, and until that was found his life must stand still.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7347">After several weeks, what he had been waiting for happened. </span>
      <span id="f7348"> He met Ruth on the street. </span>
      <span id="f7349"> It was true, she was accompanied by her brother, Norman, and it was true that they tried to ignore him and that Norman attempted to wave him aside.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7350">&#34;If you interfere with my sister, I&#39;ll call an officer,&#34; Norman threatened. </span>
      <span id="f7351"> &#34;She does not wish to speak with you, and your insistence is insult.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7352">&#34;If you persist, you&#39;ll have to call that officer, and then you&#39;ll get your name in the papers,&#34; Martin answered grimly. </span>
      <span id="f7353"> &#34;And now, get out of my way and get the officer if you want to. </span>
      <span id="f7354"> I&#39;m going to talk with Ruth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7355">&#34;I want to have it from your own lips,&#34; he said to her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7356">She was pale and trembling, but she held up and looked inquiringly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7357">&#34;The question I asked in my letter,&#34; he prompted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7358">Norman made an impatient movement, but Martin checked him with a swift look.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7359">She shook her head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7360">&#34;Is all this of your own free will?&#34; he demanded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7361">&#34;It is.&#34;  She spoke in a low, firm voice and with deliberation. </span>
      <span id="f7362"> &#34;It is of my own free will. </span>
      <span id="f7363"> You have disgraced me so that I am ashamed to meet my friends. </span>
      <span id="f7364"> They are all talking about me, I know. </span>
      <span id="f7365"> That is all I can tell you. </span>
      <span id="f7366"> You have made me very unhappy, and I never wish to see you again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7367">&#34;Friends! </span>
      <span id="f7368"> Gossip! </span>
      <span id="f7369"> Newspaper misreports! </span>
      <span id="f7370"> Surely such things are not stronger than love! </span>
      <span id="f7371"> I can only believe that you never loved me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7372">A blush drove the pallor from her face.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7373">&#34;After what has passed?&#34; she said faintly. </span>
      <span id="f7374"> &#34;Martin, you do not know what you are saying. </span>
      <span id="f7375"> I am not common.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7376">&#34;You see, she doesn&#39;t want to have anything to do with you,&#34; Norman blurted out, starting on with her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7377">Martin stood aside and let them pass, fumbling unconsciously in his coat pocket for the tobacco and brown papers that were not there.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7378">It was a long walk to North Oakland, but it was not until he went up the steps and entered his room that he knew he had walked it. </span>
      <span id="f7379"> He found himself sitting on the edge of the bed and staring about him like an awakened somnambulist. </span>
      <span id="f7380"> He noticed &#34;Overdue&#34; lying on the table and drew up his chair and reached for his pen. </span>
      <span id="f7381"> There was in his nature a logical compulsion toward completeness. </span>
      <span id="f7382"> Here was something undone. </span>
      <span id="f7383"> It had been deferred against the completion of something else. </span>
      <span id="f7384"> Now that something else had been finished, and he would apply himself to this task until it was finished. </span>
      <span id="f7385"> What he would do next he did not know. </span>
      <span id="f7386"> All that he did know was that a climacteric in his life had been attained. </span>
      <span id="f7387"> A period had been reached, and he was rounding it off in workman-like fashion. </span>
      <span id="f7388"> He was not curious about the future. </span>
      <span id="f7389"> He would soon enough find out what it held in store for him. </span>
      <span id="f7390"> Whatever it was, it did not matter. </span>
      <span id="f7391"> Nothing seemed to matter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7392">For five days he toiled on at &#34;Overdue,&#34; going nowhere, seeing nobody, and eating meagrely. </span>
      <span id="f7393"> On the morning of the sixth day the postman brought him a thin letter from the editor of The Parthenon. </span>
      <span id="f7394"> A glance told him that &#34;Ephemera&#34; was accepted. </span>
      <span id="f7395"> &#34;We have submitted the poem to Mr. </span>
      <span id="f7396">Cartwright Bruce,&#34; the editor went on to say, &#34;and he has reported so favorably upon it that we cannot let it go. </span>
      <span id="f7397"> As an earnest of our pleasure in publishing the poem, let me tell you that we have set it for the August number, our July number being already made up. </span>
      <span id="f7398"> Kindly extend our pleasure and our thanks to Mr. </span>
      <span id="f7399">Brissenden. </span>
      <span id="f7400"> Please send by return mail his photograph and biographical data. </span>
      <span id="f7401"> If our honorarium is unsatisfactory, kindly telegraph us at once and state what you consider a fair price.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7402">Since the honorarium they had offered was three hundred and fifty dollars, Martin thought it not worth while to telegraph. </span>
      <span id="f7403"> Then, too, there was Brissenden&#39;s consent to be gained. </span>
      <span id="f7404"> Well, he had been right, after all. </span>
      <span id="f7405"> Here was one magazine editor who knew real poetry when he saw it. </span>
      <span id="f7406"> And the price was splendid, even though it was for the poem of a century. </span>
      <span id="f7407"> As for Cartwright Bruce, Martin knew that he was the one critic for whose opinions Brissenden had any respect.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7408">Martin rode down town on an electric car, and as he watched the houses and cross-streets slipping by he was aware of a regret that he was not more elated over his friend&#39;s success and over his own signal victory. </span>
      <span id="f7409">The one critic in the United States had pronounced favorably on the poem, while his own contention that good stuff could find its way into the magazines had proved correct. </span>
      <span id="f7410"> But enthusiasm had lost its spring in him, and he found that he was more anxious to see Brissenden than he was to carry the good news. </span>
      <span id="f7411"> The acceptance of The Parthenon had recalled to him that during his five days&#39; devotion to &#34;Overdue&#34; he had not heard from Brissenden nor even thought about him. </span>
      <span id="f7412"> For the first time Martin realized the daze he had been in, and he felt shame for having forgotten his friend. </span>
      <span id="f7413"> But even the shame did not burn very sharply. </span>
      <span id="f7414"> He was numb to emotions of any sort save the artistic ones concerned in the writing of &#34;Overdue.&#34;  So far as other affairs were concerned, he had been in a trance. </span>
      <span id="f7415"> For that matter, he was still in a trance. </span>
      <span id="f7416"> All this life through which the electric car whirred seemed remote and unreal, and he would have experienced little interest and less shock if the great stone steeple of the church he passed had suddenly crumbled to mortar-dust upon his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7417">At the hotel he hurried up to Brissenden&#39;s room, and hurried down again. </span>
      <span id="f7418">The room was empty. </span>
      <span id="f7419"> All luggage was gone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7420">&#34;Did Mr. </span>
      <span id="f7421">Brissenden leave any address?&#34; he asked the clerk, who looked at him curiously for a moment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7422">&#34;Haven&#39;t you heard?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7423">Martin shook his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7424">&#34;Why, the papers were full of it. </span>
      <span id="f7425"> He was found dead in bed. </span>
      <span id="f7426"> Suicide. </span>
      <span id="f7427">Shot himself through the head.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7428">&#34;Is he buried yet?&#34; Martin seemed to hear his voice, like some one else&#39;s voice, from a long way off, asking the question.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7429">&#34;No. </span>
      <span id="f7430"> The body was shipped East after the inquest. </span>
      <span id="f7431"> Lawyers engaged by his people saw to the arrangements.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7432">&#34;They were quick about it, I must say,&#34; Martin commented.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7433">&#34;Oh, I don&#39;t know. </span>
      <span id="f7434"> It happened five days ago.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7435">&#34;Five days ago?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7436">&#34;Yes, five days ago.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7437">&#34;Oh,&#34; Martin said as he turned and went out.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7438">At the corner he stepped into the Western Union and sent a telegram to The Parthenon, advising them to proceed with the publication of the poem. </span>
      <span id="f7439">He had in his pocket but five cents with which to pay his carfare home, so he sent the message collect.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7440">Once in his room, he resumed his writing. </span>
      <span id="f7441"> The days and nights came and went, and he sat at his table and wrote on. </span>
      <span id="f7442"> He went nowhere, save to the pawnbroker, took no exercise, and ate methodically when he was hungry and had something to cook, and just as methodically went without when he had nothing to cook. </span>
      <span id="f7443"> Composed as the story was, in advance, chapter by chapter, he nevertheless saw and developed an opening that increased the power of it, though it necessitated twenty thousand additional words. </span>
      <span id="f7444"> It was not that there was any vital need that the thing should be well done, but that his artistic canons compelled him to do it well. </span>
      <span id="f7445"> He worked on in the daze, strangely detached from the world around him, feeling like a familiar ghost among these literary trappings of his former life. </span>
      <span id="f7446"> He remembered that some one had said that a ghost was the spirit of a man who was dead and who did not have sense enough to know it; and he paused for the moment to wonder if he were really dead and unaware of it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7447">Came the day when &#34;Overdue&#34; was finished. </span>
      <span id="f7448"> The agent of the type-writer firm had come for the machine, and he sat on the bed while Martin, on the one chair, typed the last pages of the final chapter. </span>
      <span id="f7449"> &#34;Finis,&#34; he wrote, in capitals, at the end, and to him it was indeed finis. </span>
      <span id="f7450"> He watched the type-writer carried out the door with a feeling of relief, then went over and lay down on the bed. </span>
      <span id="f7451"> He was faint from hunger. </span>
      <span id="f7452"> Food had not passed his lips in thirty-six hours, but he did not think about it. </span>
      <span id="f7453"> He lay on his back, with closed eyes, and did not think at all, while the daze or stupor slowly welled up, saturating his consciousness. </span>
      <span id="f7454"> Half in delirium, he began muttering aloud the lines of an anonymous poem Brissenden had been fond of quoting to him. </span>
      <span id="f7455"> Maria, listening anxiously outside his door, was perturbed by his monotonous utterance. </span>
      <span id="f7456"> The words in themselves were not significant to her, but the fact that he was saying them was. </span>
      <span id="f7457"> &#34;I have done,&#34; was the burden of the poem.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7458">&#34;&#39;I have done--    Put by the lute. </span>
      <span id="f7459">   Song and singing soon are over    As the airy shades that hover    In among the purple clover. </span>
      <span id="f7460">   I have done--    Put by the lute. </span>
      <span id="f7461">   Once I sang as early thrushes    Sing among the dewy bushes;    Now I&#39;m mute. </span>
      <span id="f7462">   I am like a weary linnet,    For my throat has no song in it;    I have had my singing minute. </span>
      <span id="f7463">   I have done. </span>
      <span id="f7464">   Put by the lute.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7465">Maria could stand it no longer, and hurried away to the stove, where she filled a quart-bowl with soup, putting into it the lion&#39;s share of chopped meat and vegetables which her ladle scraped from the bottom of the pot. </span>
      <span id="f7466"> Martin roused himself and sat up and began to eat, between spoonfuls reassuring Maria that he had not been talking in his sleep and that he did not have any fever.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7467">After she left him he sat drearily, with drooping shoulders, on the edge of the bed, gazing about him with lack-lustre eyes that saw nothing until the torn wrapper of a magazine, which had come in the morning&#39;s mail and which lay unopened, shot a gleam of light into his darkened brain. </span>
      <span id="f7468"> It is The Parthenon, he thought, the August Parthenon, and it must contain &#34;Ephemera.&#34;  If only Brissenden were here to see!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7469">He was turning the pages of the magazine, when suddenly he stopped. </span>
      <span id="f7470">&#34;Ephemera&#34; had been featured, with gorgeous head-piece and Beardsley-like margin decorations. </span>
      <span id="f7471"> On one side of the head-piece was Brissenden&#39;s photograph, on the other side was the photograph of Sir John Value, the British Ambassador. </span>
      <span id="f7472"> A preliminary editorial note quoted Sir John Value as saying that there were no poets in America, and the publication of &#34;Ephemera&#34; was The Parthenon&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f7473"> &#34;There, take that, Sir John Value!&#34; Cartwright Bruce was described as the greatest critic in America, and he was quoted as saying that &#34;Ephemera&#34; was the greatest poem ever written in America. </span>
      <span id="f7474"> And finally, the editor&#39;s foreword ended with: &#34;We have not yet made up our minds entirely as to the merits of &#34;Ephemera&#34;; perhaps we shall never be able to do so. </span>
      <span id="f7475"> But we have read it often, wondering at the words and their arrangement, wondering where Mr. </span>
      <span id="f7476">Brissenden got them, and how he could fasten them together.&#34;  Then followed the poem.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7477">&#34;Pretty good thing you died, Briss, old man,&#34; Martin murmured, letting the magazine slip between his knees to the floor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7478">The cheapness and vulgarity of it was nauseating, and Martin noted apathetically that he was not nauseated very much. </span>
      <span id="f7479"> He wished he could get angry, but did not have energy enough to try. </span>
      <span id="f7480"> He was too numb. </span>
      <span id="f7481"> His blood was too congealed to accelerate to the swift tidal flow of indignation. </span>
      <span id="f7482"> After all, what did it matter? </span>
      <span id="f7483"> It was on a par with all the rest that Brissenden had condemned in bourgeois society.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7484">&#34;Poor Briss,&#34; Martin communed; &#34;he would never have forgiven me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7485">Rousing himself with an effort, he possessed himself of a box which had once contained type-writer paper. </span>
      <span id="f7486"> Going through its contents, he drew forth eleven poems which his friend had written. </span>
      <span id="f7487"> These he tore lengthwise and crosswise and dropped into the waste basket. </span>
      <span id="f7488"> He did it languidly, and, when he had finished, sat on the edge of the bed staring blankly before him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7489">How long he sat there he did not know, until, suddenly, across his sightless vision he saw form a long horizontal line of white. </span>
      <span id="f7490"> It was curious. </span>
      <span id="f7491"> But as he watched it grow in definiteness he saw that it was a coral reef smoking in the white Pacific surges. </span>
      <span id="f7492"> Next, in the line of breakers he made out a small canoe, an outrigger canoe. </span>
      <span id="f7493"> In the stern he saw a young bronzed god in scarlet hip-cloth dipping a flashing paddle. </span>
      <span id="f7494">He recognized him. </span>
      <span id="f7495"> He was Moti, the youngest son of Tati, the chief, and this was Tahiti, and beyond that smoking reef lay the sweet land of Papara and the chief&#39;s grass house by the river&#39;s mouth. </span>
      <span id="f7496"> It was the end of the day, and Moti was coming home from the fishing. </span>
      <span id="f7497"> He was waiting for the rush of a big breaker whereon to jump the reef. </span>
      <span id="f7498"> Then he saw himself, sitting forward in the canoe as he had often sat in the past, dipping a paddle that waited Moti&#39;s word to dig in like mad when the turquoise wall of the great breaker rose behind them. </span>
      <span id="f7499"> Next, he was no longer an onlooker but was himself in the canoe, Moti was crying out, they were both thrusting hard with their paddles, racing on the steep face of the flying turquoise. </span>
      <span id="f7500"> Under the bow the water was hissing as from a steam jet, the air was filled with driven spray, there was a rush and rumble and long-echoing roar, and the canoe floated on the placid water of the lagoon. </span>
      <span id="f7501"> Moti laughed and shook the salt water from his eyes, and together they paddled in to the pounded-coral beach where Tati&#39;s grass walls through the cocoanut-palms showed golden in the setting sun.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7502">The picture faded, and before his eyes stretched the disorder of his squalid room. </span>
      <span id="f7503"> He strove in vain to see Tahiti again. </span>
      <span id="f7504"> He knew there was singing among the trees and that the maidens were dancing in the moonlight, but he could not see them. </span>
      <span id="f7505"> He could see only the littered writing-table, the empty space where the type-writer had stood, and the unwashed window-pane. </span>
      <span id="f7506"> He closed his eyes with a groan, and slept.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>