<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f7507">CHAPTER XLI</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f7508">He slept heavily all night, and did not stir until aroused by the postman on his morning round. </span>
      <span id="f7509"> Martin felt tired and passive, and went through his letters aimlessly. </span>
      <span id="f7510"> One thin envelope, from a robber magazine, contained for twenty-two dollars. </span>
      <span id="f7511"> He had been dunning for it for a year and a half. </span>
      <span id="f7512"> He noted its amount apathetically. </span>
      <span id="f7513"> The old-time thrill at receiving a publisher&#39;s check was gone. </span>
      <span id="f7514"> Unlike his earlier checks, this one was not pregnant with promise of great things to come. </span>
      <span id="f7515"> To him it was a check for twenty-two dollars, that was all, and it would buy him something to eat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7516">Another check was in the same mail, sent from a New York weekly in payment for some humorous verse which had been accepted months before. </span>
      <span id="f7517"> It was for ten dollars. </span>
      <span id="f7518"> An idea came to him, which he calmly considered. </span>
      <span id="f7519"> He did not know what he was going to do, and he felt in no hurry to do anything. </span>
      <span id="f7520"> In the meantime he must live. </span>
      <span id="f7521"> Also he owed numerous debts. </span>
      <span id="f7522">Would it not be a paying investment to put stamps on the huge pile of manuscripts under the table and start them on their travels again? </span>
      <span id="f7523"> One or two of them might be accepted. </span>
      <span id="f7524"> That would help him to live. </span>
      <span id="f7525"> He decided on the investment, and, after he had cashed the checks at the bank down in Oakland, he bought ten dollars&#39; worth of postage stamps. </span>
      <span id="f7526"> The thought of going home to cook breakfast in his stuffy little room was repulsive to him. </span>
      <span id="f7527"> For the first time he refused to consider his debts. </span>
      <span id="f7528">He knew that in his room he could manufacture a substantial breakfast at a cost of from fifteen to twenty cents. </span>
      <span id="f7529"> But, instead, he went into the Forum Cafe and ordered a breakfast that cost two dollars. </span>
      <span id="f7530"> He tipped the waiter a quarter, and spent fifty cents for a package of Egyptian cigarettes. </span>
      <span id="f7531"> It was the first time he had smoked since Ruth had asked him to stop. </span>
      <span id="f7532"> But he could see now no reason why he should not, and besides, he wanted to smoke. </span>
      <span id="f7533"> And what did the money matter? </span>
      <span id="f7534"> For five cents he could have bought a package of Durham and brown papers and rolled forty cigarettes--but what of it? </span>
      <span id="f7535"> Money had no meaning to him now except what it would immediately buy. </span>
      <span id="f7536"> He was chartless and rudderless, and he had no port to make, while drifting involved the least living, and it was living that hurt.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7537">The days slipped along, and he slept eight hours regularly every night. </span>
      <span id="f7538">Though now, while waiting for more checks, he ate in the Japanese restaurants where meals were served for ten cents, his wasted body filled out, as did the hollows in his cheeks. </span>
      <span id="f7539"> He no longer abused himself with short sleep, overwork, and overstudy. </span>
      <span id="f7540"> He wrote nothing, and the books were closed. </span>
      <span id="f7541"> He walked much, out in the hills, and loafed long hours in the quiet parks. </span>
      <span id="f7542"> He had no friends nor acquaintances, nor did he make any. </span>
      <span id="f7543"> He had no inclination. </span>
      <span id="f7544"> He was waiting for some impulse, from he knew not where, to put his stopped life into motion again. </span>
      <span id="f7545"> In the meantime his life remained run down, planless, and empty and idle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7546">Once he made a trip to San Francisco to look up the &#34;real dirt.&#34;  But at the last moment, as he stepped into the upstairs entrance, he recoiled and turned and fled through the swarming ghetto. </span>
      <span id="f7547"> He was frightened at the thought of hearing philosophy discussed, and he fled furtively, for fear that some one of the &#34;real dirt&#34; might chance along and recognize him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7548">Sometimes he glanced over the magazines and newspapers to see how &#34;Ephemera&#34; was being maltreated. </span>
      <span id="f7549"> It had made a hit. </span>
      <span id="f7550"> But what a hit! </span>
      <span id="f7551">Everybody had read it, and everybody was discussing whether or not it was really poetry. </span>
      <span id="f7552"> The local papers had taken it up, and daily there appeared columns of learned criticisms, facetious editorials, and serious letters from subscribers. </span>
      <span id="f7553"> Helen Della Delmar (proclaimed with a flourish of trumpets and rolling of tomtoms to be the greatest woman poet in the United States) denied Brissenden a seat beside her on Pegasus and wrote voluminous letters to the public, proving that he was no poet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7554">The Parthenon came out in its next number patting itself on the back for the stir it had made, sneering at Sir John Value, and exploiting Brissenden&#39;s death with ruthless commercialism. </span>
      <span id="f7555"> A newspaper with a sworn circulation of half a million published an original and spontaneous poem by Helen Della Delmar, in which she gibed and sneered at Brissenden. </span>
      <span id="f7556">Also, she was guilty of a second poem, in which she parodied him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7557">Martin had many times to be glad that Brissenden was dead. </span>
      <span id="f7558"> He had hated the crowd so, and here all that was finest and most sacred of him had been thrown to the crowd. </span>
      <span id="f7559"> Daily the vivisection of Beauty went on. </span>
      <span id="f7560"> Every nincompoop in the land rushed into free print, floating their wizened little egos into the public eye on the surge of Brissenden&#39;s greatness. </span>
      <span id="f7561">Quoth one paper: &#34;We have received a letter from a gentleman who wrote a poem just like it, only better, some time ago.&#34;  Another paper, in deadly seriousness, reproving Helen Della Delmar for her parody, said: &#34;But unquestionably Miss Delmar wrote it in a moment of badinage and not quite with the respect that one great poet should show to another and perhaps to the greatest. </span>
      <span id="f7562"> However, whether Miss Delmar be jealous or not of the man who invented &#39;Ephemera,&#39; it is certain that she, like thousands of others, is fascinated by his work, and that the day may come when she will try to write lines like his.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7563">Ministers began to preach sermons against &#34;Ephemera,&#34; and one, who too stoutly stood for much of its content, was expelled for heresy. </span>
      <span id="f7564"> The great poem contributed to the gayety of the world. </span>
      <span id="f7565"> The comic verse-writers and the cartoonists took hold of it with screaming laughter, and in the personal columns of society weeklies jokes were perpetrated on it to the effect that Charley Frensham told Archie Jennings, in confidence, that five lines of &#34;Ephemera&#34; would drive a man to beat a cripple, and that ten lines would send him to the bottom of the river.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7566">Martin did not laugh; nor did he grit his teeth in anger. </span>
      <span id="f7567"> The effect produced upon him was one of great sadness. </span>
      <span id="f7568"> In the crash of his whole world, with love on the pinnacle, the crash of magazinedom and the dear public was a small crash indeed. </span>
      <span id="f7569"> Brissenden had been wholly right in his judgment of the magazines, and he, Martin, had spent arduous and futile years in order to find it out for himself. </span>
      <span id="f7570"> The magazines were all Brissenden had said they were and more. </span>
      <span id="f7571"> Well, he was done, he solaced himself. </span>
      <span id="f7572"> He had hitched his wagon to a star and been landed in a pestiferous marsh. </span>
      <span id="f7573"> The visions of Tahiti--clean, sweet Tahiti--were coming to him more frequently. </span>
      <span id="f7574"> And there were the low Paumotus, and the high Marquesas; he saw himself often, now, on board trading schooners or frail little cutters, slipping out at dawn through the reef at Papeete and beginning the long beat through the pearl-atolls to Nukahiva and the Bay of Taiohae, where Tamari, he knew, would kill a pig in honor of his coming, and where Tamari&#39;s flower-garlanded daughters would seize his hands and with song and laughter garland him with flowers. </span>
      <span id="f7575"> The South Seas were calling, and he knew that sooner or later he would answer the call.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7576">In the meantime he drifted, resting and recuperating after the long traverse he had made through the realm of knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f7577"> When The Parthenon check of three hundred and fifty dollars was forwarded to him, he turned it over to the local lawyer who had attended to Brissenden&#39;s affairs for his family. </span>
      <span id="f7578"> Martin took a receipt for the check, and at the same time gave a note for the hundred dollars Brissenden had let him have.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7579">The time was not long when Martin ceased patronizing the Japanese restaurants. </span>
      <span id="f7580"> At the very moment when he had abandoned the fight, the tide turned. </span>
      <span id="f7581"> But it had turned too late. </span>
      <span id="f7582"> Without a thrill he opened a thick envelope from The Millennium, scanned the face of a check that represented three hundred dollars, and noted that it was the payment on acceptance for &#34;Adventure.&#34;  Every debt he owed in the world, including the pawnshop, with its usurious interest, amounted to less than a hundred dollars. </span>
      <span id="f7583"> And when he had paid everything, and lifted the hundred-dollar note with Brissenden&#39;s lawyer, he still had over a hundred dollars in pocket. </span>
      <span id="f7584"> He ordered a suit of clothes from the tailor and ate his meals in the best cafes in town. </span>
      <span id="f7585"> He still slept in his little room at Maria&#39;s, but the sight of his new clothes caused the neighborhood children to cease from calling him &#34;hobo&#34; and &#34;tramp&#34; from the roofs of woodsheds and over back fences.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7586">&#34;Wiki-Wiki,&#34; his Hawaiian short story, was bought by Warren&#39;s Monthly for two hundred and fifty dollars. </span>
      <span id="f7587"> The Northern Review took his essay, &#34;The Cradle of Beauty,&#34; and Mackintosh&#39;s Magazine took &#34;The Palmist&#34;--the poem he had written to Marian. </span>
      <span id="f7588"> The editors and readers were back from their summer vacations, and manuscripts were being handled quickly. </span>
      <span id="f7589"> But Martin could not puzzle out what strange whim animated them to this general acceptance of the things they had persistently rejected for two years. </span>
      <span id="f7590">Nothing of his had been published. </span>
      <span id="f7591"> He was not known anywhere outside of Oakland, and in Oakland, with the few who thought they knew him, he was notorious as a red-shirt and a socialist. </span>
      <span id="f7592"> So there was no explaining this sudden acceptability of his wares. </span>
      <span id="f7593"> It was sheer jugglery of fate.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7594">After it had been refused by a number of magazines, he had taken Brissenden&#39;s rejected advice and started, &#34;The Shame of the Sun&#34; on the round of publishers. </span>
      <span id="f7595"> After several refusals, Singletree, Darnley &amp; Co. </span>
      <span id="f7596">accepted it, promising fall publication. </span>
      <span id="f7597"> When Martin asked for an advance on royalties, they wrote that such was not their custom, that books of that nature rarely paid for themselves, and that they doubted if his book would sell a thousand copies. </span>
      <span id="f7598"> Martin figured what the book would earn him on such a sale. </span>
      <span id="f7599"> Retailed at a dollar, on a royalty of fifteen per cent, it would bring him one hundred and fifty dollars. </span>
      <span id="f7600"> He decided that if he had it to do over again he would confine himself to fiction. </span>
      <span id="f7601"> &#34;Adventure,&#34; one-fourth as long, had brought him twice as much from The Millennium. </span>
      <span id="f7602"> That newspaper paragraph he had read so long ago had been true, after all. </span>
      <span id="f7603"> The first-class magazines did not pay on acceptance, and they paid well. </span>
      <span id="f7604"> Not two cents a word, but four cents a word, had The Millennium paid him. </span>
      <span id="f7605"> And, furthermore, they bought good stuff, too, for were they not buying his? </span>
      <span id="f7606"> This last thought he accompanied with a grin.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7607">He wrote to Singletree, Darnley &amp; Co., offering to sell out his rights in &#34;The Shame of the Sun&#34; for a hundred dollars, but they did not care to take the risk. </span>
      <span id="f7608"> In the meantime he was not in need of money, for several of his later stories had been accepted and paid for. </span>
      <span id="f7609"> He actually opened a bank account, where, without a debt in the world, he had several hundred dollars to his credit. </span>
      <span id="f7610"> &#34;Overdue,&#34; after having been declined by a number of magazines, came to rest at the Meredith-Lowell Company. </span>
      <span id="f7611">Martin remembered the five dollars Gertrude had given him, and his resolve to return it to her a hundred times over; so he wrote for an advance on royalties of five hundred dollars. </span>
      <span id="f7612"> To his surprise a check for that amount, accompanied by a contract, came by return mail. </span>
      <span id="f7613"> He cashed the check into five-dollar gold pieces and telephoned Gertrude that he wanted to see her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7614">She arrived at the house panting and short of breath from the haste she had made. </span>
      <span id="f7615"> Apprehensive of trouble, she had stuffed the few dollars she possessed into her hand-satchel; and so sure was she that disaster had overtaken her brother, that she stumbled forward, sobbing, into his arms, at the same time thrusting the satchel mutely at him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7616">&#34;I&#39;d have come myself,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f7617"> &#34;But I didn&#39;t want a row with Mr. </span>
      <span id="f7618">Higginbotham, and that is what would have surely happened.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7619">&#34;He&#39;ll be all right after a time,&#34; she assured him, while she wondered what the trouble was that Martin was in. </span>
      <span id="f7620"> &#34;But you&#39;d best get a job first an&#39; steady down. </span>
      <span id="f7621"> Bernard does like to see a man at honest work. </span>
      <span id="f7622"> That stuff in the newspapers broke &#39;m all up. </span>
      <span id="f7623"> I never saw &#39;m so mad before.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7624">&#34;I&#39;m not going to get a job,&#34; Martin said with a smile. </span>
      <span id="f7625"> &#34;And you can tell him so from me. </span>
      <span id="f7626"> I don&#39;t need a job, and there&#39;s the proof of it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7627">He emptied the hundred gold pieces into her lap in a glinting, tinkling stream.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7628">&#34;You remember that fiver you gave me the time I didn&#39;t have carfare? </span>
      <span id="f7629">Well, there it is, with ninety-nine brothers of different ages but all of the same size.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7630">If Gertrude had been frightened when she arrived, she was now in a panic of fear. </span>
      <span id="f7631"> Her fear was such that it was certitude. </span>
      <span id="f7632"> She was not suspicious. </span>
      <span id="f7633"> She was convinced. </span>
      <span id="f7634"> She looked at Martin in horror, and her heavy limbs shrank under the golden stream as though it were burning her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7635">&#34;It&#39;s yours,&#34; he laughed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7636">She burst into tears, and began to moan, &#34;My poor boy, my poor boy!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7637">He was puzzled for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f7638"> Then he divined the cause of her agitation and handed her the Meredith-Lowell letter which had accompanied the check. </span>
      <span id="f7639"> She stumbled through it, pausing now and again to wipe her eyes, and when she had finished, said:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7640">&#34;An&#39; does it mean that you come by the money honestly?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7641">&#34;More honestly than if I&#39;d won it in a lottery. </span>
      <span id="f7642"> I earned it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7643">Slowly faith came back to her, and she reread the letter carefully. </span>
      <span id="f7644"> It took him long to explain to her the nature of the transaction which had put the money into his possession, and longer still to get her to understand that the money was really hers and that he did not need it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7645">&#34;I&#39;ll put it in the bank for you,&#34; she said finally.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7646">&#34;You&#39;ll do nothing of the sort. </span>
      <span id="f7647"> It&#39;s yours, to do with as you please, and if you won&#39;t take it, I&#39;ll give it to Maria. </span>
      <span id="f7648"> She&#39;ll know what to do with it. </span>
      <span id="f7649"> I&#39;d suggest, though, that you hire a servant and take a good long rest.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7650">&#34;I&#39;m goin&#39; to tell Bernard all about it,&#34; she announced, when she was leaving.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7651">Martin winced, then grinned.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7652">&#34;Yes, do,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f7653"> &#34;And then, maybe, he&#39;ll invite me to dinner again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7654">&#34;Yes, he will--I&#39;m sure he will!&#34; she exclaimed fervently, as she drew him to her and kissed and hugged him.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>