<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f7655">CHAPTER XLII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f7656">One day Martin became aware that he was lonely. </span>
      <span id="f7657"> He was healthy and strong, and had nothing to do. </span>
      <span id="f7658"> The cessation from writing and studying, the death of Brissenden, and the estrangement from Ruth had made a big hole in his life; and his life refused to be pinned down to good living in cafes and the smoking of Egyptian cigarettes. </span>
      <span id="f7659"> It was true the South Seas were calling to him, but he had a feeling that the game was not yet played out in the United States. </span>
      <span id="f7660"> Two books were soon to be published, and he had more books that might find publication. </span>
      <span id="f7661"> Money could be made out of them, and he would wait and take a sackful of it into the South Seas. </span>
      <span id="f7662"> He knew a valley and a bay in the Marquesas that he could buy for a thousand Chili dollars. </span>
      <span id="f7663"> The valley ran from the horseshoe, land-locked bay to the tops of the dizzy, cloud-capped peaks and contained perhaps ten thousand acres. </span>
      <span id="f7664"> It was filled with tropical fruits, wild chickens, and wild pigs, with an occasional herd of wild cattle, while high up among the peaks were herds of wild goats harried by packs of wild dogs. </span>
      <span id="f7665">The whole place was wild. </span>
      <span id="f7666"> Not a human lived in it. </span>
      <span id="f7667">And he could buy it and the bay for a thousand Chili dollars.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7668">The bay, as he remembered it, was magnificent, with water deep enough to accommodate the largest vessel afloat, and so safe that the South Pacific Directory recommended it to the best careening place for ships for hundreds of miles around. </span>
      <span id="f7669"> He would buy a schooner--one of those yacht- like, coppered crafts that sailed like witches--and go trading copra and pearling among the islands. </span>
      <span id="f7670"> He would make the valley and the bay his headquarters. </span>
      <span id="f7671"> He would build a patriarchal grass house like Tati&#39;s, and have it and the valley and the schooner filled with dark-skinned servitors. </span>
      <span id="f7672"> He would entertain there the factor of Taiohae, captains of wandering traders, and all the best of the South Pacific riffraff. </span>
      <span id="f7673"> He would keep open house and entertain like a prince. </span>
      <span id="f7674"> And he would forget the books he had opened and the world that had proved an illusion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7675">To do all this he must wait in California to fill the sack with money. </span>
      <span id="f7676">Already it was beginning to flow in. </span>
      <span id="f7677"> If one of the books made a strike, it might enable him to sell the whole heap of manuscripts. </span>
      <span id="f7678"> Also he could collect the stories and the poems into books, and make sure of the valley and the bay and the schooner. </span>
      <span id="f7679"> He would never write again. </span>
      <span id="f7680"> Upon that he was resolved. </span>
      <span id="f7681"> But in the meantime, awaiting the publication of the books, he must do something more than live dazed and stupid in the sort of uncaring trance into which he had fallen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7682">He noted, one Sunday morning, that the Bricklayers&#39; Picnic took place that day at Shell Mound Park, and to Shell Mound Park he went. </span>
      <span id="f7683"> He had been to the working-class picnics too often in his earlier life not to know what they were like, and as he entered the park he experienced a recrudescence of all the old sensations. </span>
      <span id="f7684"> After all, they were his kind, these working people. </span>
      <span id="f7685"> He had been born among them, he had lived among them, and though he had strayed for a time, it was well to come back among them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7686">&#34;If it ain&#39;t Mart!&#34; he heard some one say, and the next moment a hearty hand was on his shoulder. </span>
      <span id="f7687"> &#34;Where you ben all the time? </span>
      <span id="f7688"> Off to sea? </span>
      <span id="f7689"> Come on an&#39; have a drink.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7690">It was the old crowd in which he found himself--the old crowd, with here and there a gap, and here and there a new face. </span>
      <span id="f7691"> The fellows were not bricklayers, but, as in the old days, they attended all Sunday picnics for the dancing, and the fighting, and the fun. </span>
      <span id="f7692"> Martin drank with them, and began to feel really human once more. </span>
      <span id="f7693"> He was a fool to have ever left them, he thought; and he was very certain that his sum of happiness would have been greater had he remained with them and let alone the books and the people who sat in the high places. </span>
      <span id="f7694"> Yet the beer seemed not so good as of yore. </span>
      <span id="f7695"> It didn&#39;t taste as it used to taste. </span>
      <span id="f7696"> Brissenden had spoiled him for steam beer, he concluded, and wondered if, after all, the books had spoiled him for companionship with these friends of his youth. </span>
      <span id="f7697">He resolved that he would not be so spoiled, and he went on to the dancing pavilion. </span>
      <span id="f7698"> Jimmy, the plumber, he met there, in the company of a tall, blond girl who promptly forsook him for Martin.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7699">&#34;Gee, it&#39;s like old times,&#34; Jimmy explained to the gang that gave him the laugh as Martin and the blonde whirled away in a waltz. </span>
      <span id="f7700"> &#34;An&#39; I don&#39;t give a rap. </span>
      <span id="f7701"> I&#39;m too damned glad to see &#39;m back. </span>
      <span id="f7702"> Watch &#39;m waltz, eh? </span>
      <span id="f7703">It&#39;s like silk. </span>
      <span id="f7704"> Who&#39;d blame any girl?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7705">But Martin restored the blonde to Jimmy, and the three of them, with half a dozen friends, watched the revolving couples and laughed and joked with one another. </span>
      <span id="f7706"> Everybody was glad to see Martin back. </span>
      <span id="f7707"> No book of his been published; he carried no fictitious value in their eyes. </span>
      <span id="f7708"> They liked him for himself. </span>
      <span id="f7709"> He felt like a prince returned from excile, and his lonely heart burgeoned in the geniality in which it bathed. </span>
      <span id="f7710"> He made a mad day of it, and was at his best. </span>
      <span id="f7711"> Also, he had money in his pockets, and, as in the old days when he returned from sea with a pay-day, he made the money fly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7712">Once, on the dancing-floor, he saw Lizzie Connolly go by in the arms of a young workingman; and, later, when he made the round of the pavilion, he came upon her sitting by a refreshment table. </span>
      <span id="f7713"> Surprise and greetings over, he led her away into the grounds, where they could talk without shouting down the music. </span>
      <span id="f7714"> From the instant he spoke to her, she was his. </span>
      <span id="f7715">He knew it. </span>
      <span id="f7716"> She showed it in the proud humility of her eyes, in every caressing movement of her proudly carried body, and in the way she hung upon his speech. </span>
      <span id="f7717"> She was not the young girl as he had known her. </span>
      <span id="f7718"> She was a woman, now, and Martin noted that her wild, defiant beauty had improved, losing none of its wildness, while the defiance and the fire seemed more in control. </span>
      <span id="f7719"> &#34;A beauty, a perfect beauty,&#34; he murmured admiringly under his breath. </span>
      <span id="f7720"> And he knew she was his, that all he had to do was to say &#34;Come,&#34; and she would go with him over the world wherever he led.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7721">Even as the thought flashed through his brain he received a heavy blow on the side of his head that nearly knocked him down. </span>
      <span id="f7722"> It was a man&#39;s fist, directed by a man so angry and in such haste that the fist had missed the jaw for which it was aimed. </span>
      <span id="f7723"> Martin turned as he staggered, and saw the fist coming at him in a wild swing. </span>
      <span id="f7724"> Quite as a matter of course he ducked, and the fist flew harmlessly past, pivoting the man who had driven it. </span>
      <span id="f7725"> Martin hooked with his left, landing on the pivoting man with the weight of his body behind the blow. </span>
      <span id="f7726"> The man went to the ground sidewise, leaped to his feet, and made a mad rush. </span>
      <span id="f7727"> Martin saw his passion-distorted face and wondered what could be the cause of the fellow&#39;s anger. </span>
      <span id="f7728"> But while he wondered, he shot in a straight left, the weight of his body behind the blow. </span>
      <span id="f7729"> The man went over backward and fell in a crumpled heap. </span>
      <span id="f7730"> Jimmy and others of the gang were running toward them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7731">Martin was thrilling all over. </span>
      <span id="f7732"> This was the old days with a vengeance, with their dancing, and their fighting, and their fun. </span>
      <span id="f7733"> While he kept a wary eye on his antagonist, he glanced at Lizzie. </span>
      <span id="f7734"> Usually the girls screamed when the fellows got to scrapping, but she had not screamed. </span>
      <span id="f7735"> She was looking on with bated breath, leaning slightly forward, so keen was her interest, one hand pressed to her breast, her cheek flushed, and in her eyes a great and amazed admiration.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7736">The man had gained his feet and was struggling to escape the restraining arms that were laid on him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7737">&#34;She was waitin&#39; for me to come back!&#34; he was proclaiming to all and sundry. </span>
      <span id="f7738"> &#34;She was waitin&#39; for me to come back, an&#39; then that fresh guy comes buttin&#39; in. </span>
      <span id="f7739"> Let go o&#39; me, I tell yeh. </span>
      <span id="f7740"> I&#39;m goin&#39; to fix &#39;m.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7741">&#34;What&#39;s eatin&#39; yer?&#34; Jimmy was demanding, as he helped hold the young fellow back. </span>
      <span id="f7742"> &#34;That guy&#39;s Mart Eden. </span>
      <span id="f7743"> He&#39;s nifty with his mits, lemme tell you that, an&#39; he&#39;ll eat you alive if you monkey with &#39;m.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7744">&#34;He can&#39;t steal her on me that way,&#34; the other interjected.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7745">&#34;He licked the Flyin&#39; Dutchman, an&#39; you know _him_,&#34; Jimmy went on expostulating. </span>
      <span id="f7746"> &#34;An&#39; he did it in five rounds. </span>
      <span id="f7747"> You couldn&#39;t last a minute against him. </span>
      <span id="f7748"> See?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7749">This information seemed to have a mollifying effect, and the irate young man favored Martin with a measuring stare.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7750">&#34;He don&#39;t look it,&#34; he sneered; but the sneer was without passion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7751">&#34;That&#39;s what the Flyin&#39; Dutchman thought,&#34; Jimmy assured him. </span>
      <span id="f7752"> &#34;Come on, now, let&#39;s get outa this. </span>
      <span id="f7753"> There&#39;s lots of other girls. </span>
      <span id="f7754"> Come on.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7755">The young fellow allowed himself to be led away toward the pavilion, and the gang followed after him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7756">&#34;Who is he?&#34; Martin asked Lizzie. </span>
      <span id="f7757"> &#34;And what&#39;s it all about, anyway?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7758">Already the zest of combat, which of old had been so keen and lasting, had died down, and he discovered that he was self-analytical, too much so to live, single heart and single hand, so primitive an existence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7759">Lizzie tossed her head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7760">&#34;Oh, he&#39;s nobody,&#34; she said. </span>
      <span id="f7761"> &#34;He&#39;s just ben keepin&#39; company with me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7762">&#34;I had to, you see,&#34; she explained after a pause. </span>
      <span id="f7763"> &#34;I was gettin&#39; pretty lonesome. </span>
      <span id="f7764"> But I never forgot.&#34;  Her voice sank lower, and she looked straight before her. </span>
      <span id="f7765"> &#34;I&#39;d throw &#39;m down for you any time.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7766">Martin looking at her averted face, knowing that all he had to do was to reach out his hand and pluck her, fell to pondering whether, after all, there was any real worth in refined, grammatical English, and, so, forgot to reply to her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7767">&#34;You put it all over him,&#34; she said tentatively, with a laugh.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7768">&#34;He&#39;s a husky young fellow, though,&#34; he admitted generously. </span>
      <span id="f7769"> &#34;If they hadn&#39;t taken him away, he might have given me my hands full.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7770">&#34;Who was that lady friend I seen you with that night?&#34; she asked abruptly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7771">&#34;Oh, just a lady friend,&#34; was his answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7772">&#34;It was a long time ago,&#34; she murmured contemplatively. </span>
      <span id="f7773"> &#34;It seems like a thousand years.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7774">But Martin went no further into the matter. </span>
      <span id="f7775"> He led the conversation off into other channels. </span>
      <span id="f7776"> They had lunch in the restaurant, where he ordered wine and expensive delicacies and afterward he danced with her and with no one but her, till she was tired. </span>
      <span id="f7777"> He was a good dancer, and she whirled around and around with him in a heaven of delight, her head against his shoulder, wishing that it could last forever. </span>
      <span id="f7778"> Later in the afternoon they strayed off among the trees, where, in the good old fashion, she sat down while he sprawled on his back, his head in her lap. </span>
      <span id="f7779">He lay and dozed, while she fondled his hair, looked down on his closed eyes, and loved him without reserve. </span>
      <span id="f7780"> Looking up suddenly, he read the tender advertisement in her face. </span>
      <span id="f7781"> Her eyes fluttered down, then they opened and looked into his with soft defiance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7782">&#34;I&#39;ve kept straight all these years,&#34; she said, her voice so low that it was almost a whisper.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7783">In his heart Martin knew that it was the miraculous truth. </span>
      <span id="f7784"> And at his heart pleaded a great temptation. </span>
      <span id="f7785"> It was in his power to make her happy. </span>
      <span id="f7786">Denied happiness himself, why should he deny happiness to her? </span>
      <span id="f7787"> He could marry her and take her down with him to dwell in the grass-walled castle in the Marquesas. </span>
      <span id="f7788"> The desire to do it was strong, but stronger still was the imperative command of his nature not to do it. </span>
      <span id="f7789"> In spite of himself he was still faithful to Love. </span>
      <span id="f7790"> The old days of license and easy living were gone. </span>
      <span id="f7791"> He could not bring them back, nor could he go back to them. </span>
      <span id="f7792">He was changed--how changed he had not realized until now.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7793">&#34;I am not a marrying man, Lizzie,&#34; he said lightly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7794">The hand caressing his hair paused perceptibly, then went on with the same gentle stroke. </span>
      <span id="f7795"> He noticed her face harden, but it was with the hardness of resolution, for still the soft color was in her cheeks and she was all glowing and melting.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7796">&#34;I did not mean that--&#34; she began, then faltered. </span>
      <span id="f7797"> &#34;Or anyway I don&#39;t care.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7798">&#34;I don&#39;t care,&#34; she repeated. </span>
      <span id="f7799"> &#34;I&#39;m proud to be your friend. </span>
      <span id="f7800"> I&#39;d do anything for you. </span>
      <span id="f7801"> I&#39;m made that way, I guess.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7802">Martin sat up. </span>
      <span id="f7803"> He took her hand in his. </span>
      <span id="f7804"> He did it deliberately, with warmth but without passion; and such warmth chilled her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7805">&#34;Don&#39;t let&#39;s talk about it,&#34; she said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7806">&#34;You are a great and noble woman,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f7807"> &#34;And it is I who should be proud to know you. </span>
      <span id="f7808"> And I am, I am. </span>
      <span id="f7809"> You are a ray of light to me in a very dark world, and I&#39;ve got to be straight with you, just as straight as you have been.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7810">&#34;I don&#39;t care whether you&#39;re straight with me or not. </span>
      <span id="f7811"> You could do anything with me. </span>
      <span id="f7812"> You could throw me in the dirt an&#39; walk on me. </span>
      <span id="f7813"> An&#39; you&#39;re the only man in the world that can,&#34; she added with a defiant flash. </span>
      <span id="f7814"> &#34;I ain&#39;t taken care of myself ever since I was a kid for nothin&#39;.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7815">&#34;And it&#39;s just because of that that I&#39;m not going to,&#34; he said gently. </span>
      <span id="f7816">&#34;You are so big and generous that you challenge me to equal generousness. </span>
      <span id="f7817">I&#39;m not marrying, and I&#39;m not--well, loving without marrying, though I&#39;ve done my share of that in the past. </span>
      <span id="f7818"> I&#39;m sorry I came here to-day and met you. </span>
      <span id="f7819"> But it can&#39;t be helped now, and I never expected it would turn out this way.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7820">&#34;But look here, Lizzie. </span>
      <span id="f7821"> I can&#39;t begin to tell you how much I like you. </span>
      <span id="f7822"> I do more than like you. </span>
      <span id="f7823"> I admire and respect you. </span>
      <span id="f7824"> You are magnificent, and you are magnificently good. </span>
      <span id="f7825"> But what&#39;s the use of words? </span>
      <span id="f7826"> Yet there&#39;s something I&#39;d like to do. </span>
      <span id="f7827"> You&#39;ve had a hard life; let me make it easy for you.&#34;  (A joyous light welled into her eyes, then faded out again.)  &#34;I&#39;m pretty sure of getting hold of some money soon--lots of it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7828">In that moment he abandoned the idea of the valley and the bay, the grass- walled castle and the trim, white schooner. </span>
      <span id="f7829"> After all, what did it matter? </span>
      <span id="f7830"> He could go away, as he had done so often, before the mast, on any ship bound anywhere.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7831">&#34;I&#39;d like to turn it over to you. </span>
      <span id="f7832"> There must be something you want--to go to school or business college. </span>
      <span id="f7833"> You might like to study and be a stenographer. </span>
      <span id="f7834"> I could fix it for you. </span>
      <span id="f7835"> Or maybe your father and mother are living--I could set them up in a grocery store or something. </span>
      <span id="f7836"> Anything you want, just name it, and I can fix it for you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7837">She made no reply, but sat, gazing straight before her, dry-eyed and motionless, but with an ache in the throat which Martin divined so strongly that it made his own throat ache. </span>
      <span id="f7838"> He regretted that he had spoken. </span>
      <span id="f7839"> It seemed so tawdry what he had offered her--mere money--compared with what she offered him. </span>
      <span id="f7840"> He offered her an extraneous thing with which he could part without a pang, while she offered him herself, along with disgrace and shame, and sin, and all her hopes of heaven.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7841">&#34;Don&#39;t let&#39;s talk about it,&#34; she said with a catch in her voice that she changed to a cough. </span>
      <span id="f7842"> She stood up. </span>
      <span id="f7843"> &#34;Come on, let&#39;s go home. </span>
      <span id="f7844"> I&#39;m all tired out.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7845">The day was done, and the merrymakers had nearly all departed. </span>
      <span id="f7846"> But as Martin and Lizzie emerged from the trees they found the gang waiting for them. </span>
      <span id="f7847"> Martin knew immediately the meaning of it. </span>
      <span id="f7848"> Trouble was brewing. </span>
      <span id="f7849">The gang was his body-guard. </span>
      <span id="f7850"> They passed out through the gates of the park with, straggling in the rear, a second gang, the friends that Lizzie&#39;s young man had collected to avenge the loss of his lady. </span>
      <span id="f7851"> Several constables and special police officers, anticipating trouble, trailed along to prevent it, and herded the two gangs separately aboard the train for San Francisco. </span>
      <span id="f7852"> Martin told Jimmy that he would get off at Sixteenth Street Station and catch the electric car into Oakland. </span>
      <span id="f7853"> Lizzie was very quiet and without interest in what was impending. </span>
      <span id="f7854"> The train pulled in to Sixteenth Street Station, and the waiting electric car could be seen, the conductor of which was impatiently clanging the gong.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7855">&#34;There she is,&#34; Jimmy counselled. </span>
      <span id="f7856"> &#34;Make a run for it, an&#39; we&#39;ll hold &#39;em back. </span>
      <span id="f7857"> Now you go! </span>
      <span id="f7858"> Hit her up!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7859">The hostile gang was temporarily disconcerted by the manoeuvre, then it dashed from the train in pursuit. </span>
      <span id="f7860"> The staid and sober Oakland folk who sat upon the car scarcely noted the young fellow and the girl who ran for it and found a seat in front on the outside. </span>
      <span id="f7861"> They did not connect the couple with Jimmy, who sprang on the steps, crying to the motorman:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7862">&#34;Slam on the juice, old man, and beat it outa here!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7863">The next moment Jimmy whirled about, and the passengers saw him land his fist on the face of a running man who was trying to board the car. </span>
      <span id="f7864"> But fists were landing on faces the whole length of the car. </span>
      <span id="f7865"> Thus, Jimmy and his gang, strung out on the long, lower steps, met the attacking gang. </span>
      <span id="f7866">The car started with a great clanging of its gong, and, as Jimmy&#39;s gang drove off the last assailants, they, too, jumped off to finish the job. </span>
      <span id="f7867">The car dashed on, leaving the flurry of combat far behind, and its dumfounded passengers never dreamed that the quiet young man and the pretty working-girl sitting in the corner on the outside seat had been the cause of the row.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7868">Martin had enjoyed the fight, with a recrudescence of the old fighting thrills. </span>
      <span id="f7869"> But they quickly died away, and he was oppressed by a great sadness. </span>
      <span id="f7870"> He felt very old--centuries older than those careless, care- free young companions of his others days. </span>
      <span id="f7871"> He had travelled far, too far to go back. </span>
      <span id="f7872"> Their mode of life, which had once been his, was now distasteful to him. </span>
      <span id="f7873"> He was disappointed in it all. </span>
      <span id="f7874"> He had developed into an alien. </span>
      <span id="f7875"> As the steam beer had tasted raw, so their companionship seemed raw to him. </span>
      <span id="f7876"> He was too far removed. </span>
      <span id="f7877"> Too many thousands of opened books yawned between them and him. </span>
      <span id="f7878"> He had exiled himself. </span>
      <span id="f7879"> He had travelled in the vast realm of intellect until he could no longer return home. </span>
      <span id="f7880"> On the other hand, he was human, and his gregarious need for companionship remained unsatisfied. </span>
      <span id="f7881"> He had found no new home. </span>
      <span id="f7882"> As the gang could not understand him, as his own family could not understand him, as the bourgeoisie could not understand him, so this girl beside him, whom he honored high, could not understand him nor the honor he paid her. </span>
      <span id="f7883"> His sadness was not untouched with bitterness as he thought it over.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7884">&#34;Make it up with him,&#34; he advised Lizzie, at parting, as they stood in front of the workingman&#39;s shack in which she lived, near Sixth and Market. </span>
      <span id="f7885"> He referred to the young fellow whose place he had usurped that day.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7886">&#34;I can&#39;t--now,&#34; she said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7887">&#34;Oh, go on,&#34; he said jovially. </span>
      <span id="f7888"> &#34;All you have to do is whistle and he&#39;ll come running.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7889">&#34;I didn&#39;t mean that,&#34; she said simply.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7890">And he knew what she had meant.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7891">She leaned toward him as he was about to say good night. </span>
      <span id="f7892"> But she leaned not imperatively, not seductively, but wistfully and humbly. </span>
      <span id="f7893"> He was touched to the heart. </span>
      <span id="f7894"> His large tolerance rose up in him. </span>
      <span id="f7895"> He put his arms around her, and kissed her, and knew that upon his own lips rested as true a kiss as man ever received.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7896">&#34;My God!&#34; she sobbed. </span>
      <span id="f7897"> &#34;I could die for you. </span>
      <span id="f7898"> I could die for you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7899">She tore herself from him suddenly and ran up the steps. </span>
      <span id="f7900"> He felt a quick moisture in his eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7901">&#34;Martin Eden,&#34; he communed. </span>
      <span id="f7902"> &#34;You&#39;re not a brute, and you&#39;re a damn poor Nietzscheman. </span>
      <span id="f7903"> You&#39;d marry her if you could and fill her quivering heart full with happiness. </span>
      <span id="f7904"> But you can&#39;t, you can&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f7905"> And it&#39;s a damn shame.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7906">&#34;&#39;A poor old tramp explains his poor old ulcers,&#39;&#34; he muttered, remembering his Henly. </span>
      <span id="f7907"> &#34;&#39;Life is, I think, a blunder and a shame.&#39;  It is--a blunder and a shame.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>