<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f7908">CHAPTER XLIII</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f7909">&#34;The Shame of the Sun&#34; was published in October. </span>
      <span id="f7910"> As Martin cut the cords of the express package and the half-dozen complimentary copies from the publishers spilled out on the table, a heavy sadness fell upon him. </span>
      <span id="f7911"> He thought of the wild delight that would have been his had this happened a few short months before, and he contrasted that delight that should have been with his present uncaring coldness. </span>
      <span id="f7912"> His book, his first book, and his pulse had not gone up a fraction of a beat, and he was only sad. </span>
      <span id="f7913"> It meant little to him now. </span>
      <span id="f7914"> The most it meant was that it might bring some money, and little enough did he care for money.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7915">He carried a copy out into the kitchen and presented it to Maria.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7916">&#34;I did it,&#34; he explained, in order to clear up her bewilderment. </span>
      <span id="f7917"> &#34;I wrote it in the room there, and I guess some few quarts of your vegetable soup went into the making of it. </span>
      <span id="f7918"> Keep it. </span>
      <span id="f7919"> It&#39;s yours. </span>
      <span id="f7920"> Just to remember me by, you know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7921">He was not bragging, not showing off. </span>
      <span id="f7922"> His sole motive was to make her happy, to make her proud of him, to justify her long faith in him. </span>
      <span id="f7923"> She put the book in the front room on top of the family Bible. </span>
      <span id="f7924"> A sacred thing was this book her lodger had made, a fetich of friendship. </span>
      <span id="f7925"> It softened the blow of his having been a laundryman, and though she could not understand a line of it, she knew that every line of it was great. </span>
      <span id="f7926">She was a simple, practical, hard-working woman, but she possessed faith in large endowment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7927">Just as emotionlessly as he had received &#34;The Shame of the Sun&#34; did he read the reviews of it that came in weekly from the clipping bureau. </span>
      <span id="f7928"> The book was making a hit, that was evident. </span>
      <span id="f7929"> It meant more gold in the money sack. </span>
      <span id="f7930"> He could fix up Lizzie, redeem all his promises, and still have enough left to build his grass-walled castle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7931">Singletree, Darnley &amp; Co. </span>
      <span id="f7932">had cautiously brought out an edition of fifteen hundred copies, but the first reviews had started a second edition of twice the size through the presses; and ere this was delivered a third edition of five thousand had been ordered. </span>
      <span id="f7933"> A London firm made arrangements by cable for an English edition, and hot-footed upon this came the news of French, German, and Scandinavian translations in progress. </span>
      <span id="f7934"> The attack upon the Maeterlinck school could not have been made at a more opportune moment. </span>
      <span id="f7935"> A fierce controversy was precipitated. </span>
      <span id="f7936">Saleeby and Haeckel indorsed and defended &#34;The Shame of the Sun,&#34; for once finding themselves on the same side of a question. </span>
      <span id="f7937"> Crookes and Wallace ranged up on the opposing side, while Sir Oliver Lodge attempted to formulate a compromise that would jibe with his particular cosmic theories. </span>
      <span id="f7938"> Maeterlinck&#39;s followers rallied around the standard of mysticism. </span>
      <span id="f7939"> Chesterton set the whole world laughing with a series of alleged non-partisan essays on the subject, and the whole affair, controversy and controversialists, was well-nigh swept into the pit by a thundering broadside from George Bernard Shaw. </span>
      <span id="f7940"> Needless to say the arena was crowded with hosts of lesser lights, and the dust and sweat and din became terrific.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7941">&#34;It is a most marvellous happening,&#34; Singletree, Darnley &amp; Co. </span>
      <span id="f7942">wrote Martin, &#34;a critical philosophic essay selling like a novel. </span>
      <span id="f7943"> You could not have chosen your subject better, and all contributory factors have been unwarrantedly propitious. </span>
      <span id="f7944"> We need scarcely to assure you that we are making hay while the sun shines. </span>
      <span id="f7945"> Over forty thousand copies have already been sold in the United States and Canada, and a new edition of twenty thousand is on the presses. </span>
      <span id="f7946"> We are overworked, trying to supply the demand. </span>
      <span id="f7947"> Nevertheless we have helped to create that demand. </span>
      <span id="f7948"> We have already spent five thousand dollars in advertising. </span>
      <span id="f7949"> The book is bound to be a record-breaker.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7950">&#34;Please find herewith a contract in duplicate for your next book which we have taken the liberty of forwarding to you. </span>
      <span id="f7951"> You will please note that we have increased your royalties to twenty per cent, which is about as high as a conservative publishing house dares go. </span>
      <span id="f7952"> If our offer is agreeable to you, please fill in the proper blank space with the title of your book. </span>
      <span id="f7953"> We make no stipulations concerning its nature. </span>
      <span id="f7954"> Any book on any subject. </span>
      <span id="f7955"> If you have one already written, so much the better. </span>
      <span id="f7956"> Now is the time to strike. </span>
      <span id="f7957"> The iron could not be hotter.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7958">&#34;On receipt of signed contract we shall be pleased to make you an advance on royalties of five thousand dollars. </span>
      <span id="f7959"> You see, we have faith in you, and we are going in on this thing big. </span>
      <span id="f7960"> We should like, also, to discuss with you the drawing up of a contract for a term of years, say ten, during which we shall have the exclusive right of publishing in book-form all that you produce. </span>
      <span id="f7961"> But more of this anon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7962">Martin laid down the letter and worked a problem in mental arithmetic, finding the product of fifteen cents times sixty thousand to be nine thousand dollars. </span>
      <span id="f7963"> He signed the new contract, inserting &#34;The Smoke of Joy&#34; in the blank space, and mailed it back to the publishers along with the twenty storiettes he had written in the days before he discovered the formula for the newspaper storiette. </span>
      <span id="f7964"> And promptly as the United States mail could deliver and return, came Singletree, Darnley &amp; Co.&#39;s check for five thousand dollars.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7965">&#34;I want you to come down town with me, Maria, this afternoon about two o&#39;clock,&#34; Martin said, the morning the check arrived. </span>
      <span id="f7966"> &#34;Or, better, meet me at Fourteenth and Broadway at two o&#39;clock. </span>
      <span id="f7967"> I&#39;ll be looking out for you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7968">At the appointed time she was there; but _shoes_ was the only clew to the mystery her mind had been capable of evolving, and she suffered a distinct shock of disappointment when Martin walked her right by a shoe- store and dived into a real estate office. </span>
      <span id="f7969"> What happened thereupon resided forever after in her memory as a dream. </span>
      <span id="f7970"> Fine gentlemen smiled at her benevolently as they talked with Martin and one another; a type-writer clicked; signatures were affixed to an imposing document; her own landlord was there, too, and affixed his signature; and when all was over and she was outside on the sidewalk, her landlord spoke to her, saying, &#34;Well, Maria, you won&#39;t have to pay me no seven dollars and a half this month.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7971">Maria was too stunned for speech.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7972">&#34;Or next month, or the next, or the next,&#34; her landlord said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7973">She thanked him incoherently, as if for a favor. </span>
      <span id="f7974"> And it was not until she had returned home to North Oakland and conferred with her own kind, and had the Portuguese grocer investigate, that she really knew that she was the owner of the little house in which she had lived and for which she had paid rent so long.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7975">&#34;Why don&#39;t you trade with me no more?&#34; the Portuguese grocer asked Martin that evening, stepping out to hail him when he got off the car; and Martin explained that he wasn&#39;t doing his own cooking any more, and then went in and had a drink of wine on the house. </span>
      <span id="f7976"> He noted it was the best wine the grocer had in stock.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7977">&#34;Maria,&#34; Martin announced that night, &#34;I&#39;m going to leave you. </span>
      <span id="f7978"> And you&#39;re going to leave here yourself soon. </span>
      <span id="f7979"> Then you can rent the house and be a landlord yourself. </span>
      <span id="f7980"> You&#39;ve a brother in San Leandro or Haywards, and he&#39;s in the milk business. </span>
      <span id="f7981"> I want you to send all your washing back unwashed--understand?--unwashed, and to go out to San Leandro to-morrow, or Haywards, or wherever it is, and see that brother of yours. </span>
      <span id="f7982"> Tell him to come to see me. </span>
      <span id="f7983"> I&#39;ll be stopping at the Metropole down in Oakland. </span>
      <span id="f7984">He&#39;ll know a good milk-ranch when he sees one.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7985">And so it was that Maria became a landlord and the sole owner of a dairy, with two hired men to do the work for her and a bank account that steadily increased despite the fact that her whole brood wore shoes and went to school. </span>
      <span id="f7986"> Few persons ever meet the fairy princes they dream about; but Maria, who worked hard and whose head was hard, never dreaming about fairy princes, entertained hers in the guise of an ex-laundryman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7987">In the meantime the world had begun to ask: &#34;Who is this Martin Eden?&#34;  He had declined to give any biographical data to his publishers, but the newspapers were not to be denied. </span>
      <span id="f7988"> Oakland was his own town, and the reporters nosed out scores of individuals who could supply information. </span>
      <span id="f7989">All that he was and was not, all that he had done and most of what he had not done, was spread out for the delectation of the public, accompanied by snapshots and photographs--the latter procured from the local photographer who had once taken Martin&#39;s picture and who promptly copyrighted it and put it on the market. </span>
      <span id="f7990"> At first, so great was his disgust with the magazines and all bourgeois society, Martin fought against publicity; but in the end, because it was easier than not to, he surrendered. </span>
      <span id="f7991"> He found that he could not refuse himself to the special writers who travelled long distances to see him. </span>
      <span id="f7992"> Then again, each day was so many hours long, and, since he no longer was occupied with writing and studying, those hours had to be occupied somehow; so he yielded to what was to him a whim, permitted interviews, gave his opinions on literature and philosophy, and even accepted invitations of the bourgeoisie. </span>
      <span id="f7993"> He had settled down into a strange and comfortable state of mind. </span>
      <span id="f7994"> He no longer cared. </span>
      <span id="f7995"> He forgave everybody, even the cub reporter who had painted him red and to whom he now granted a full page with specially posed photographs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f7996">He saw Lizzie occasionally, and it was patent that she regretted the greatness that had come to him. </span>
      <span id="f7997"> It widened the space between them. </span>
      <span id="f7998">Perhaps it was with the hope of narrowing it that she yielded to his persuasions to go to night school and business college and to have herself gowned by a wonderful dressmaker who charged outrageous prices. </span>
      <span id="f7999">She improved visibly from day to day, until Martin wondered if he was doing right, for he knew that all her compliance and endeavor was for his sake. </span>
      <span id="f8000"> She was trying to make herself of worth in his eyes--of the sort of worth he seemed to value. </span>
      <span id="f8001"> Yet he gave her no hope, treating her in brotherly fashion and rarely seeing her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8002">&#34;Overdue&#34; was rushed upon the market by the Meredith-Lowell Company in the height of his popularity, and being fiction, in point of sales it made even a bigger strike than &#34;The Shame of the Sun.&#34;  Week after week his was the credit of the unprecedented performance of having two books at the head of the list of best-sellers. </span>
      <span id="f8003"> Not only did the story take with the fiction-readers, but those who read &#34;The Shame of the Sun&#34; with avidity were likewise attracted to the sea-story by the cosmic grasp of mastery with which he had handled it. </span>
      <span id="f8004"> First he had attacked the literature of mysticism, and had done it exceeding well; and, next, he had successfully supplied the very literature he had exposited, thus proving himself to be that rare genius, a critic and a creator in one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8005">Money poured in on him, fame poured in on him; he flashed, comet-like, through the world of literature, and he was more amused than interested by the stir he was making. </span>
      <span id="f8006"> One thing was puzzling him, a little thing that would have puzzled the world had it known. </span>
      <span id="f8007"> But the world would have puzzled over his bepuzzlement rather than over the little thing that to him loomed gigantic. </span>
      <span id="f8008"> Judge Blount invited him to dinner. </span>
      <span id="f8009"> That was the little thing, or the beginning of the little thing, that was soon to become the big thing. </span>
      <span id="f8010"> He had insulted Judge Blount, treated him abominably, and Judge Blount, meeting him on the street, invited him to dinner. </span>
      <span id="f8011"> Martin bethought himself of the numerous occasions on which he had met Judge Blount at the Morses&#39; and when Judge Blount had not invited him to dinner. </span>
      <span id="f8012"> Why had he not invited him to dinner then? </span>
      <span id="f8013">he asked himself. </span>
      <span id="f8014"> He had not changed. </span>
      <span id="f8015"> He was the same Martin Eden. </span>
      <span id="f8016"> What made the difference? </span>
      <span id="f8017"> The fact that the stuff he had written had appeared inside the covers of books? </span>
      <span id="f8018"> But it was work performed. </span>
      <span id="f8019"> It was not something he had done since. </span>
      <span id="f8020"> It was achievement accomplished at the very time Judge Blount was sharing this general view and sneering at his Spencer and his intellect. </span>
      <span id="f8021"> Therefore it was not for any real value, but for a purely fictitious value that Judge Blount invited him to dinner.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8022">Martin grinned and accepted the invitation, marvelling the while at his complacence. </span>
      <span id="f8023"> And at the dinner, where, with their womankind, were half a dozen of those that sat in high places, and where Martin found himself quite the lion, Judge Blount, warmly seconded by Judge Hanwell, urged privately that Martin should permit his name to be put up for the Styx--the ultra-select club to which belonged, not the mere men of wealth, but the men of attainment. </span>
      <span id="f8024"> And Martin declined, and was more puzzled than ever.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8025">He was kept busy disposing of his heap of manuscripts. </span>
      <span id="f8026"> He was overwhelmed by requests from editors. </span>
      <span id="f8027"> It had been discovered that he was a stylist, with meat under his style. </span>
      <span id="f8028"> The Northern Review, after publishing &#34;The Cradle of Beauty,&#34; had written him for half a dozen similar essays, which would have been supplied out of the heap, had not Burton&#39;s Magazine, in a speculative mood, offered him five hundred dollars each for five essays. </span>
      <span id="f8029"> He wrote back that he would supply the demand, but at a thousand dollars an essay. </span>
      <span id="f8030"> He remembered that all these manuscripts had been refused by the very magazines that were now clamoring for them. </span>
      <span id="f8031"> And their refusals had been cold-blooded, automatic, stereotyped. </span>
      <span id="f8032"> They had made him sweat, and now he intended to make them sweat. </span>
      <span id="f8033"> Burton&#39;s Magazine paid his price for five essays, and the remaining four, at the same rate, were snapped up by Mackintosh&#39;s Monthly, The Northern Review being too poor to stand the pace. </span>
      <span id="f8034"> Thus went out to the world &#34;The High Priests of Mystery,&#34; &#34;The Wonder-Dreamers,&#34; &#34;The Yardstick of the Ego,&#34; &#34;Philosophy of Illusion,&#34; &#34;God and Clod,&#34; &#34;Art and Biology,&#34; &#34;Critics and Test-tubes,&#34; &#34;Star-dust,&#34; and &#34;The Dignity of Usury,&#34;--to raise storms and rumblings and mutterings that were many a day in dying down.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8035">Editors wrote to him telling him to name his own terms, which he did, but it was always for work performed. </span>
      <span id="f8036"> He refused resolutely to pledge himself to any new thing. </span>
      <span id="f8037"> The thought of again setting pen to paper maddened him. </span>
      <span id="f8038"> He had seen Brissenden torn to pieces by the crowd, and despite the fact that him the crowd acclaimed, he could not get over the shock nor gather any respect for the crowd. </span>
      <span id="f8039"> His very popularity seemed a disgrace and a treason to Brissenden. </span>
      <span id="f8040"> It made him wince, but he made up his mind to go on and fill the money-bag.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8041">He received letters from editors like the following: &#34;About a year ago we were unfortunate enough to refuse your collection of love-poems. </span>
      <span id="f8042"> We were greatly impressed by them at the time, but certain arrangements already entered into prevented our taking them. </span>
      <span id="f8043"> If you still have them, and if you will be kind enough to forward them, we shall be glad to publish the entire collection on your own terms. </span>
      <span id="f8044"> We are also prepared to make a most advantageous offer for bringing them out in book-form.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8045">Martin recollected his blank-verse tragedy, and sent it instead. </span>
      <span id="f8046"> He read it over before mailing, and was particularly impressed by its sophomoric amateurishness and general worthlessness. </span>
      <span id="f8047"> But he sent it; and it was published, to the everlasting regret of the editor. </span>
      <span id="f8048"> The public was indignant and incredulous. </span>
      <span id="f8049"> It was too far a cry from Martin Eden&#39;s high standard to that serious bosh. </span>
      <span id="f8050"> It was asserted that he had never written it, that the magazine had faked it very clumsily, or that Martin Eden was emulating the elder Dumas and at the height of success was hiring his writing done for him. </span>
      <span id="f8051"> But when he explained that the tragedy was an early effort of his literary childhood, and that the magazine had refused to be happy unless it got it, a great laugh went up at the magazine&#39;s expense and a change in the editorship followed. </span>
      <span id="f8052"> The tragedy was never brought out in book-form, though Martin pocketed the advance royalties that had been paid.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8053">Coleman&#39;s Weekly sent Martin a lengthy telegram, costing nearly three hundred dollars, offering him a thousand dollars an article for twenty articles. </span>
      <span id="f8054"> He was to travel over the United States, with all expenses paid, and select whatever topics interested him. </span>
      <span id="f8055"> The body of the telegram was devoted to hypothetical topics in order to show him the freedom of range that was to be his. </span>
      <span id="f8056"> The only restriction placed upon him was that he must confine himself to the United States. </span>
      <span id="f8057"> Martin sent his inability to accept and his regrets by wire &#34;collect.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8058">&#34;Wiki-Wiki,&#34; published in Warren&#39;s Monthly, was an instantaneous success. </span>
      <span id="f8059">It was brought out forward in a wide-margined, beautifully decorated volume that struck the holiday trade and sold like wildfire. </span>
      <span id="f8060"> The critics were unanimous in the belief that it would take its place with those two classics by two great writers, &#34;The Bottle Imp&#34; and &#34;The Magic Skin.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8061">The public, however, received the &#34;Smoke of Joy&#34; collection rather dubiously and coldly. </span>
      <span id="f8062"> The audacity and unconventionality of the storiettes was a shock to bourgeois morality and prejudice; but when Paris went mad over the immediate translation that was made, the American and English reading public followed suit and bought so many copies that Martin compelled the conservative house of Singletree, Darnley &amp; Co. </span>
      <span id="f8063">to pay a flat royalty of twenty-five per cent for a third book, and thirty per cent flat for a fourth. </span>
      <span id="f8064"> These two volumes comprised all the short stories he had written and which had received, or were receiving, serial publication. </span>
      <span id="f8065"> &#34;The Ring of Bells&#34; and his horror stories constituted one collection; the other collection was composed of &#34;Adventure,&#34; &#34;The Pot,&#34; &#34;The Wine of Life,&#34; &#34;The Whirlpool,&#34; &#34;The Jostling Street,&#34; and four other stories. </span>
      <span id="f8066"> The Lowell-Meredith Company captured the collection of all his essays, and the Maxmillian Company got his &#34;Sea Lyrics&#34; and the &#34;Love-cycle,&#34; the latter receiving serial publication in the Ladies&#39; Home Companion after the payment of an extortionate price.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8067">Martin heaved a sigh of relief when he had disposed of the last manuscript. </span>
      <span id="f8068"> The grass-walled castle and the white, coppered schooner were very near to him. </span>
      <span id="f8069"> Well, at any rate he had discovered Brissenden&#39;s contention that nothing of merit found its way into the magazines. </span>
      <span id="f8070"> His own success demonstrated that Brissenden had been wrong.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8071">And yet, somehow, he had a feeling that Brissenden had been right, after all. </span>
      <span id="f8072"> &#34;The Shame of the Sun&#34; had been the cause of his success more than the stuff he had written. </span>
      <span id="f8073"> That stuff had been merely incidental. </span>
      <span id="f8074"> It had been rejected right and left by the magazines. </span>
      <span id="f8075"> The publication of &#34;The Shame of the Sun&#34; had started a controversy and precipitated the landslide in his favor. </span>
      <span id="f8076"> Had there been no &#34;Shame of the Sun&#34; there would have been no landslide, and had there been no miracle in the go of &#34;The Shame of the Sun&#34; there would have been no landslide. </span>
      <span id="f8077"> Singletree, Darnley &amp; Co. </span>
      <span id="f8078">attested that miracle. </span>
      <span id="f8079"> They had brought out a first edition of fifteen hundred copies and been dubious of selling it. </span>
      <span id="f8080"> They were experienced publishers and no one had been more astounded than they at the success which had followed. </span>
      <span id="f8081"> To them it had been in truth a miracle. </span>
      <span id="f8082"> They never got over it, and every letter they wrote him reflected their reverent awe of that first mysterious happening. </span>
      <span id="f8083"> They did not attempt to explain it. </span>
      <span id="f8084"> There was no explaining it. </span>
      <span id="f8085"> It had happened. </span>
      <span id="f8086"> In the face of all experience to the contrary, it had happened.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8087">So it was, reasoning thus, that Martin questioned the validity of his popularity. </span>
      <span id="f8088"> It was the bourgeoisie that bought his books and poured its gold into his money-sack, and from what little he knew of the bourgeoisie it was not clear to him how it could possibly appreciate or comprehend what he had written. </span>
      <span id="f8089"> His intrinsic beauty and power meant nothing to the hundreds of thousands who were acclaiming him and buying his books. </span>
      <span id="f8090"> He was the fad of the hour, the adventurer who had stormed Parnassus while the gods nodded. </span>
      <span id="f8091"> The hundreds of thousands read him and acclaimed him with the same brute non-understanding with which they had flung themselves on Brissenden&#39;s &#34;Ephemera&#34; and torn it to pieces--a wolf-rabble that fawned on him instead of fanging him. </span>
      <span id="f8092"> Fawn or fang, it was all a matter of chance. </span>
      <span id="f8093"> One thing he knew with absolute certitude: &#34;Ephemera&#34; was infinitely greater than anything he had done. </span>
      <span id="f8094"> It was infinitely greater than anything he had in him. </span>
      <span id="f8095"> It was a poem of centuries. </span>
      <span id="f8096"> Then the tribute the mob paid him was a sorry tribute indeed, for that same mob had wallowed &#34;Ephemera&#34; into the mire. </span>
      <span id="f8097"> He sighed heavily and with satisfaction. </span>
      <span id="f8098"> He was glad the last manuscript was sold and that he would soon be done with it all.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>