<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f8099">CHAPTER XLIV</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f8100">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f8101">Morse met Martin in the office of the Hotel Metropole. </span>
      <span id="f8102"> Whether he had happened there just casually, intent on other affairs, or whether he had come there for the direct purpose of inviting him to dinner, Martin never could quite make up his mind, though he inclined toward the second hypothesis. </span>
      <span id="f8103"> At any rate, invited to dinner he was by Mr. </span>
      <span id="f8104">Morse--Ruth&#39;s father, who had forbidden him the house and broken off the engagement.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8105">Martin was not angry. </span>
      <span id="f8106"> He was not even on his dignity. </span>
      <span id="f8107"> He tolerated Mr. </span>
      <span id="f8108">Morse, wondering the while how it felt to eat such humble pie. </span>
      <span id="f8109"> He did not decline the invitation. </span>
      <span id="f8110"> Instead, he put it off with vagueness and indefiniteness and inquired after the family, particularly after Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f8111">Morse and Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f8112"> He spoke her name without hesitancy, naturally, though secretly surprised that he had had no inward quiver, no old, familiar increase of pulse and warm surge of blood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8113">He had many invitations to dinner, some of which he accepted. </span>
      <span id="f8114"> Persons got themselves introduced to him in order to invite him to dinner. </span>
      <span id="f8115"> And he went on puzzling over the little thing that was becoming a great thing. </span>
      <span id="f8116"> Bernard Higginbotham invited him to dinner. </span>
      <span id="f8117"> He puzzled the harder. </span>
      <span id="f8118"> He remembered the days of his desperate starvation when no one invited him to dinner. </span>
      <span id="f8119"> That was the time he needed dinners, and went weak and faint for lack of them and lost weight from sheer famine. </span>
      <span id="f8120"> That was the paradox of it. </span>
      <span id="f8121"> When he wanted dinners, no one gave them to him, and now that he could buy a hundred thousand dinners and was losing his appetite, dinners were thrust upon him right and left. </span>
      <span id="f8122"> But why? </span>
      <span id="f8123"> There was no justice in it, no merit on his part. </span>
      <span id="f8124"> He was no different. </span>
      <span id="f8125"> All the work he had done was even at that time work performed. </span>
      <span id="f8126"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f8127">and Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f8128">Morse had condemned him for an idler and a shirk and through Ruth had urged that he take a clerk&#39;s position in an office. </span>
      <span id="f8129"> Furthermore, they had been aware of his work performed. </span>
      <span id="f8130"> Manuscript after manuscript of his had been turned over to them by Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f8131"> They had read them. </span>
      <span id="f8132"> It was the very same work that had put his name in all the papers, and, it was his name being in all the papers that led them to invite him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8133">One thing was certain: the Morses had not cared to have him for himself or for his work. </span>
      <span id="f8134"> Therefore they could not want him now for himself or for his work, but for the fame that was his, because he was somebody amongst men, and--why not?--because he had a hundred thousand dollars or so. </span>
      <span id="f8135"> That was the way bourgeois society valued a man, and who was he to expect it otherwise? </span>
      <span id="f8136"> But he was proud. </span>
      <span id="f8137"> He disdained such valuation. </span>
      <span id="f8138"> He desired to be valued for himself, or for his work, which, after all, was an expression of himself. </span>
      <span id="f8139"> That was the way Lizzie valued him. </span>
      <span id="f8140"> The work, with her, did not even count. </span>
      <span id="f8141"> She valued him, himself. </span>
      <span id="f8142"> That was the way Jimmy, the plumber, and all the old gang valued him. </span>
      <span id="f8143"> That had been proved often enough in the days when he ran with them; it had been proved that Sunday at Shell Mound Park. </span>
      <span id="f8144"> His work could go hang. </span>
      <span id="f8145"> What they liked, and were willing to scrap for, was just Mart Eden, one of the bunch and a pretty good guy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8146">Then there was Ruth. </span>
      <span id="f8147"> She had liked him for himself, that was indisputable. </span>
      <span id="f8148"> And yet, much as she had liked him she had liked the bourgeois standard of valuation more. </span>
      <span id="f8149"> She had opposed his writing, and principally, it seemed to him, because it did not earn money. </span>
      <span id="f8150"> That had been her criticism of his &#34;Love-cycle.&#34;  She, too, had urged him to get a job. </span>
      <span id="f8151"> It was true, she refined it to &#34;position,&#34; but it meant the same thing, and in his own mind the old nomenclature stuck. </span>
      <span id="f8152"> He had read her all that he wrote--poems, stories, essays--&#34;Wiki-Wiki,&#34; &#34;The Shame of the Sun,&#34; everything. </span>
      <span id="f8153"> And she had always and consistently urged him to get a job, to go to work--good God!--as if he hadn&#39;t been working, robbing sleep, exhausting life, in order to be worthy of her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8154">So the little thing grew bigger. </span>
      <span id="f8155"> He was healthy and normal, ate regularly, slept long hours, and yet the growing little thing was becoming an obsession. </span>
      <span id="f8156"> Work performed. </span>
      <span id="f8157"> The phrase haunted his brain. </span>
      <span id="f8158"> He sat opposite Bernard Higginbotham at a heavy Sunday dinner over Higginbotham&#39;s Cash Store, and it was all he could do to restrain himself from shouting out:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8159">&#34;It was work performed! </span>
      <span id="f8160"> And now you feed me, when then you let me starve, forbade me your house, and damned me because I wouldn&#39;t get a job. </span>
      <span id="f8161"> And the work was already done, all done. </span>
      <span id="f8162"> And now, when I speak, you check the thought unuttered on your lips and hang on my lips and pay respectful attention to whatever I choose to say. </span>
      <span id="f8163"> I tell you your party is rotten and filled with grafters, and instead of flying into a rage you hum and haw and admit there is a great deal in what I say. </span>
      <span id="f8164"> And why? </span>
      <span id="f8165">Because I&#39;m famous; because I&#39;ve a lot of money. </span>
      <span id="f8166"> Not because I&#39;m Martin Eden, a pretty good fellow and not particularly a fool. </span>
      <span id="f8167"> I could tell you the moon is made of green cheese and you would subscribe to the notion, at least you would not repudiate it, because I&#39;ve got dollars, mountains of them. </span>
      <span id="f8168"> And it was all done long ago; it was work performed, I tell you, when you spat upon me as the dirt under your feet.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8169">But Martin did not shout out. </span>
      <span id="f8170"> The thought gnawed in his brain, an unceasing torment, while he smiled and succeeded in being tolerant. </span>
      <span id="f8171"> As he grew silent, Bernard Higginbotham got the reins and did the talking. </span>
      <span id="f8172">He was a success himself, and proud of it. </span>
      <span id="f8173"> He was self-made. </span>
      <span id="f8174"> No one had helped him. </span>
      <span id="f8175"> He owed no man. </span>
      <span id="f8176"> He was fulfilling his duty as a citizen and bringing up a large family. </span>
      <span id="f8177"> And there was Higginbotham&#39;s Cash Store, that monument of his own industry and ability. </span>
      <span id="f8178"> He loved Higginbotham&#39;s Cash Store as some men loved their wives. </span>
      <span id="f8179"> He opened up his heart to Martin, showed with what keenness and with what enormous planning he had made the store. </span>
      <span id="f8180"> And he had plans for it, ambitious plans. </span>
      <span id="f8181"> The neighborhood was growing up fast. </span>
      <span id="f8182"> The store was really too small. </span>
      <span id="f8183"> If he had more room, he would be able to put in a score of labor-saving and money-saving improvements. </span>
      <span id="f8184"> And he would do it yet. </span>
      <span id="f8185"> He was straining every effort for the day when he could buy the adjoining lot and put up another two-story frame building. </span>
      <span id="f8186"> The upstairs he could rent, and the whole ground-floor of both buildings would be Higginbotham&#39;s Cash Store. </span>
      <span id="f8187">His eyes glistened when he spoke of the new sign that would stretch clear across both buildings.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8188">Martin forgot to listen. </span>
      <span id="f8189"> The refrain of &#34;Work performed,&#34; in his own brain, was drowning the other&#39;s clatter. </span>
      <span id="f8190"> The refrain maddened him, and he tried to escape from it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8191">&#34;How much did you say it would cost?&#34; he asked suddenly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8192">His brother-in-law paused in the middle of an expatiation on the business opportunities of the neighborhood. </span>
      <span id="f8193"> He hadn&#39;t said how much it would cost. </span>
      <span id="f8194"> But he knew. </span>
      <span id="f8195"> He had figured it out a score of times.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8196">&#34;At the way lumber is now,&#34; he said, &#34;four thousand could do it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8197">&#34;Including the sign?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8198">&#34;I didn&#39;t count on that. </span>
      <span id="f8199"> It&#39;d just have to come, onc&#39;t the buildin&#39; was there.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8200">&#34;And the ground?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8201">&#34;Three thousand more.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8202">He leaned forward, licking his lips, nervously spreading and closing his fingers, while he watched Martin write a check. </span>
      <span id="f8203"> When it was passed over to him, he glanced at the amount-seven thousand dollars.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8204">&#34;I--I can&#39;t afford to pay more than six per cent,&#34; he said huskily.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8205">Martin wanted to laugh, but, instead, demanded:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8206">&#34;How much would that be?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8207">&#34;Lemme see. </span>
      <span id="f8208"> Six per cent--six times seven--four hundred an&#39; twenty.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8209">&#34;That would be thirty-five dollars a month, wouldn&#39;t it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8210">Higginbotham nodded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8211">&#34;Then, if you&#39;ve no objection, well arrange it this way.&#34;  Martin glanced at Gertrude. </span>
      <span id="f8212"> &#34;You can have the principal to keep for yourself, if you&#39;ll use the thirty-five dollars a month for cooking and washing and scrubbing. </span>
      <span id="f8213"> The seven thousand is yours if you&#39;ll guarantee that Gertrude does no more drudgery. </span>
      <span id="f8214"> Is it a go?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8215">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f8216">Higginbotham swallowed hard. </span>
      <span id="f8217"> That his wife should do no more housework was an affront to his thrifty soul. </span>
      <span id="f8218"> The magnificent present was the coating of a pill, a bitter pill. </span>
      <span id="f8219"> That his wife should not work! </span>
      <span id="f8220">It gagged him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8221">&#34;All right, then,&#34; Martin said. </span>
      <span id="f8222"> &#34;I&#39;ll pay the thirty-five a month, and--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8223">He reached across the table for the check. </span>
      <span id="f8224"> But Bernard Higginbotham got his hand on it first, crying:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8225">&#34;I accept! </span>
      <span id="f8226"> I accept!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8227">When Martin got on the electric car, he was very sick and tired. </span>
      <span id="f8228"> He looked up at the assertive sign.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8229">&#34;The swine,&#34; he groaned. </span>
      <span id="f8230"> &#34;The swine, the swine.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8231">When Mackintosh&#39;s Magazine published &#34;The Palmist,&#34; featuring it with decorations by Berthier and with two pictures by Wenn, Hermann von Schmidt forgot that he had called the verses obscene. </span>
      <span id="f8232"> He announced that his wife had inspired the poem, saw to it that the news reached the ears of a reporter, and submitted to an interview by a staff writer who was accompanied by a staff photographer and a staff artist. </span>
      <span id="f8233"> The result was a full page in a Sunday supplement, filled with photographs and idealized drawings of Marian, with many intimate details of Martin Eden and his family, and with the full text of &#34;The Palmist&#34; in large type, and republished by special permission of Mackintosh&#39;s Magazine. </span>
      <span id="f8234"> It caused quite a stir in the neighborhood, and good housewives were proud to have the acquaintances of the great writer&#39;s sister, while those who had not made haste to cultivate it. </span>
      <span id="f8235"> Hermann von Schmidt chuckled in his little repair shop and decided to order a new lathe. </span>
      <span id="f8236"> &#34;Better than advertising,&#34; he told Marian, &#34;and it costs nothing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8237">&#34;We&#39;d better have him to dinner,&#34; she suggested.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8238">And to dinner Martin came, making himself agreeable with the fat wholesale butcher and his fatter wife--important folk, they, likely to be of use to a rising young man like Hermann Von Schmidt. </span>
      <span id="f8239"> No less a bait, however, had been required to draw them to his house than his great brother-in-law. </span>
      <span id="f8240"> Another man at table who had swallowed the same bait was the superintendent of the Pacific Coast agencies for the Asa Bicycle Company. </span>
      <span id="f8241"> Him Von Schmidt desired to please and propitiate because from him could be obtained the Oakland agency for the bicycle. </span>
      <span id="f8242"> So Hermann von Schmidt found it a goodly asset to have Martin for a brother-in-law, but in his heart of hearts he couldn&#39;t understand where it all came in. </span>
      <span id="f8243"> In the silent watches of the night, while his wife slept, he had floundered through Martin&#39;s books and poems, and decided that the world was a fool to buy them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8244">And in his heart of hearts Martin understood the situation only too well, as he leaned back and gloated at Von Schmidt&#39;s head, in fancy punching it well-nigh off of him, sending blow after blow home just right--the chuckle-headed Dutchman! </span>
      <span id="f8245"> One thing he did like about him, however. </span>
      <span id="f8246"> Poor as he was, and determined to rise as he was, he nevertheless hired one servant to take the heavy work off of Marian&#39;s hands. </span>
      <span id="f8247"> Martin talked with the superintendent of the Asa agencies, and after dinner he drew him aside with Hermann, whom he backed financially for the best bicycle store with fittings in Oakland. </span>
      <span id="f8248"> He went further, and in a private talk with Hermann told him to keep his eyes open for an automobile agency and garage, for there was no reason that he should not be able to run both establishments successfully.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8249">With tears in her eyes and her arms around his neck, Marian, at parting, told Martin how much she loved him and always had loved him. </span>
      <span id="f8250"> It was true, there was a perceptible halt midway in her assertion, which she glossed over with more tears and kisses and incoherent stammerings, and which Martin inferred to be her appeal for forgiveness for the time she had lacked faith in him and insisted on his getting a job.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8251">&#34;He can&#39;t never keep his money, that&#39;s sure,&#34; Hermann von Schmidt confided to his wife. </span>
      <span id="f8252"> &#34;He got mad when I spoke of interest, an&#39; he said damn the principal and if I mentioned it again, he&#39;d punch my Dutch head off. </span>
      <span id="f8253"> That&#39;s what he said--my Dutch head. </span>
      <span id="f8254"> But he&#39;s all right, even if he ain&#39;t no business man. </span>
      <span id="f8255"> He&#39;s given me my chance, an&#39; he&#39;s all right.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8256">Invitations to dinner poured in on Martin; and the more they poured, the more he puzzled. </span>
      <span id="f8257"> He sat, the guest of honor, at an Arden Club banquet, with men of note whom he had heard about and read about all his life; and they told him how, when they had read &#34;The Ring of Bells&#34; in the Transcontinental, and &#34;The Peri and the Pearl&#34; in The Hornet, they had immediately picked him for a winner. </span>
      <span id="f8258"> My God! </span>
      <span id="f8259">and I was hungry and in rags, he thought to himself. </span>
      <span id="f8260"> Why didn&#39;t you give me a dinner then? </span>
      <span id="f8261"> Then was the time. </span>
      <span id="f8262"> It was work performed. </span>
      <span id="f8263"> If you are feeding me now for work performed, why did you not feed me then when I needed it? </span>
      <span id="f8264"> Not one word in &#34;The Ring of Bells,&#34; nor in &#34;The Peri and the Pearl&#34; has been changed. </span>
      <span id="f8265">No; you&#39;re not feeding me now for work performed. </span>
      <span id="f8266"> You are feeding me because everybody else is feeding me and because it is an honor to feed me. </span>
      <span id="f8267"> You are feeding me now because you are herd animals; because you are part of the mob; because the one blind, automatic thought in the mob-mind just now is to feed me. </span>
      <span id="f8268"> And where does Martin Eden and the work Martin Eden performed come in in all this? </span>
      <span id="f8269">he asked himself plaintively, then arose to respond cleverly and wittily to a clever and witty toast.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8270">So it went. </span>
      <span id="f8271"> Wherever he happened to be--at the Press Club, at the Redwood Club, at pink teas and literary gatherings--always were remembered &#34;The Ring of Bells&#34; and &#34;The Peri and the Pearl&#34; when they were first published. </span>
      <span id="f8272"> And always was Martin&#39;s maddening and unuttered demand: Why didn&#39;t you feed me then? </span>
      <span id="f8273"> It was work performed. </span>
      <span id="f8274"> &#34;The Ring of Bells&#34; and &#34;The Peri and the Pearl&#34; are not changed one iota. </span>
      <span id="f8275"> They were just as artistic, just as worth while, then as now. </span>
      <span id="f8276"> But you are not feeding me for their sake, nor for the sake of anything else I have written. </span>
      <span id="f8277"> You&#39;re feeding me because it is the style of feeding just now, because the whole mob is crazy with the idea of feeding Martin Eden.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8278">And often, at such times, he would abruptly see slouch in among the company a young hoodlum in square-cut coat and under a stiff-rim Stetson hat. </span>
      <span id="f8279"> It happened to him at the Gallina Society in Oakland one afternoon. </span>
      <span id="f8280">As he rose from his chair and stepped forward across the platform, he saw stalk through the wide door at the rear of the great room the young hoodlum with the square-cut coat and stiff-rim hat. </span>
      <span id="f8281"> Five hundred fashionably gowned women turned their heads, so intent and steadfast was Martin&#39;s gaze, to see what he was seeing. </span>
      <span id="f8282"> But they saw only the empty centre aisle. </span>
      <span id="f8283"> He saw the young tough lurching down that aisle and wondered if he would remove the stiff-rim which never yet had he seen him without. </span>
      <span id="f8284"> Straight down the aisle he came, and up the platform. </span>
      <span id="f8285"> Martin could have wept over that youthful shade of himself, when he thought of all that lay before him. </span>
      <span id="f8286"> Across the platform he swaggered, right up to Martin, and into the foreground of Martin&#39;s consciousness disappeared. </span>
      <span id="f8287">The five hundred women applauded softly with gloved hands, seeking to encourage the bashful great man who was their guest. </span>
      <span id="f8288"> And Martin shook the vision from his brain, smiled, and began to speak.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8289">The Superintendent of Schools, good old man, stopped Martin on the street and remembered him, recalling seances in his office when Martin was expelled from school for fighting.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8290">&#34;I read your &#39;Ring of Bells&#39; in one of the magazines quite a time ago,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f8291"> &#34;It was as good as Poe. </span>
      <span id="f8292"> Splendid, I said at the time, splendid!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8293">Yes, and twice in the months that followed you passed me on the street and did not know me, Martin almost said aloud. </span>
      <span id="f8294"> Each time I was hungry and heading for the pawnbroker. </span>
      <span id="f8295"> Yet it was work performed. </span>
      <span id="f8296"> You did not know me then. </span>
      <span id="f8297"> Why do you know me now?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8298">&#34;I was remarking to my wife only the other day,&#34; the other was saying, &#34;wouldn&#39;t it be a good idea to have you out to dinner some time? </span>
      <span id="f8299"> And she quite agreed with me. </span>
      <span id="f8300"> Yes, she quite agreed with me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8301">&#34;Dinner?&#34; Martin said so sharply that it was almost a snarl.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8302">&#34;Why, yes, yes, dinner, you know--just pot luck with us, with your old superintendent, you rascal,&#34; he uttered nervously, poking Martin in an attempt at jocular fellowship.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8303">Martin went down the street in a daze. </span>
      <span id="f8304"> He stopped at the corner and looked about him vacantly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8305">&#34;Well, I&#39;ll be damned!&#34; he murmured at last. </span>
      <span id="f8306"> &#34;The old fellow was afraid of me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>