<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f8307">CHAPTER XLV</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f8308">Kreis came to Martin one day--Kreis, of the &#34;real dirt&#34;; and Martin turned to him with relief, to receive the glowing details of a scheme sufficiently wild-catty to interest him as a fictionist rather than an investor. </span>
      <span id="f8309"> Kreis paused long enough in the midst of his exposition to tell him that in most of his &#34;Shame of the Sun&#34; he had been a chump.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8310">&#34;But I didn&#39;t come here to spout philosophy,&#34; Kreis went on. </span>
      <span id="f8311"> &#34;What I want to know is whether or not you will put a thousand dollars in on this deal?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8312">&#34;No, I&#39;m not chump enough for that, at any rate,&#34; Martin answered. </span>
      <span id="f8313"> &#34;But I&#39;ll tell you what I will do. </span>
      <span id="f8314"> You gave me the greatest night of my life. </span>
      <span id="f8315">You gave me what money cannot buy. </span>
      <span id="f8316"> Now I&#39;ve got money, and it means nothing to me. </span>
      <span id="f8317"> I&#39;d like to turn over to you a thousand dollars of what I don&#39;t value for what you gave me that night and which was beyond price. </span>
      <span id="f8318">You need the money. </span>
      <span id="f8319"> I&#39;ve got more than I need. </span>
      <span id="f8320"> You want it. </span>
      <span id="f8321"> You came for it. </span>
      <span id="f8322"> There&#39;s no use scheming it out of me. </span>
      <span id="f8323"> Take it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8324">Kreis betrayed no surprise. </span>
      <span id="f8325"> He folded the check away in his pocket.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8326">&#34;At that rate I&#39;d like the contract of providing you with many such nights,&#34; he said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8327">&#34;Too late.&#34;  Martin shook his head. </span>
      <span id="f8328"> &#34;That night was the one night for me. </span>
      <span id="f8329"> I was in paradise. </span>
      <span id="f8330"> It&#39;s commonplace with you, I know. </span>
      <span id="f8331"> But it wasn&#39;t to me. </span>
      <span id="f8332"> I shall never live at such a pitch again. </span>
      <span id="f8333"> I&#39;m done with philosophy. </span>
      <span id="f8334"> I want never to hear another word of it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8335">&#34;The first dollar I ever made in my life out of my philosophy,&#34; Kreis remarked, as he paused in the doorway. </span>
      <span id="f8336"> &#34;And then the market broke.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8337">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f8338">Morse drove by Martin on the street one day, and smiled and nodded. </span>
      <span id="f8339">He smiled back and lifted his hat. </span>
      <span id="f8340"> The episode did not affect him. </span>
      <span id="f8341"> A month before it might have disgusted him, or made him curious and set him to speculating about her state of consciousness at that moment. </span>
      <span id="f8342"> But now it was not provocative of a second thought. </span>
      <span id="f8343"> He forgot about it the next moment. </span>
      <span id="f8344"> He forgot about it as he would have forgotten the Central Bank Building or the City Hall after having walked past them. </span>
      <span id="f8345"> Yet his mind was preternaturally active. </span>
      <span id="f8346"> His thoughts went ever around and around in a circle. </span>
      <span id="f8347"> The centre of that circle was &#34;work performed&#34;; it ate at his brain like a deathless maggot. </span>
      <span id="f8348"> He awoke to it in the morning. </span>
      <span id="f8349"> It tormented his dreams at night. </span>
      <span id="f8350"> Every affair of life around him that penetrated through his senses immediately related itself to &#34;work performed.&#34;  He drove along the path of relentless logic to the conclusion that he was nobody, nothing. </span>
      <span id="f8351"> Mart Eden, the hoodlum, and Mart Eden, the sailor, had been real, had been he; but Martin Eden! </span>
      <span id="f8352">the famous writer, did not exist. </span>
      <span id="f8353"> Martin Eden, the famous writer, was a vapor that had arisen in the mob-mind and by the mob-mind had been thrust into the corporeal being of Mart Eden, the hoodlum and sailor. </span>
      <span id="f8354"> But it couldn&#39;t fool him. </span>
      <span id="f8355"> He was not that sun-myth that the mob was worshipping and sacrificing dinners to. </span>
      <span id="f8356"> He knew better.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8357">He read the magazines about himself, and pored over portraits of himself published therein until he was unable to associate his identity with those portraits. </span>
      <span id="f8358"> He was the fellow who had lived and thrilled and loved; who had been easy-going and tolerant of the frailties of life; who had served in the forecastle, wandered in strange lands, and led his gang in the old fighting days. </span>
      <span id="f8359"> He was the fellow who had been stunned at first by the thousands of books in the free library, and who had afterward learned his way among them and mastered them; he was the fellow who had burned the midnight oil and bedded with a spur and written books himself. </span>
      <span id="f8360">But the one thing he was not was that colossal appetite that all the mob was bent upon feeding.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8361">There were things, however, in the magazines that amused him. </span>
      <span id="f8362"> All the magazines were claiming him. </span>
      <span id="f8363"> Warren&#39;s Monthly advertised to its subscribers that it was always on the quest after new writers, and that, among others, it had introduced Martin Eden to the reading public. </span>
      <span id="f8364"> The White Mouse claimed him; so did The Northern Review and Mackintosh&#39;s Magazine, until silenced by The Globe, which pointed triumphantly to its files where the mangled &#34;Sea Lyrics&#34; lay buried. </span>
      <span id="f8365"> Youth and Age, which had come to life again after having escaped paying its bills, put in a prior claim, which nobody but farmers&#39; children ever read. </span>
      <span id="f8366"> The Transcontinental made a dignified and convincing statement of how it first discovered Martin Eden, which was warmly disputed by The Hornet, with the exhibit of &#34;The Peri and the Pearl.&#34;  The modest claim of Singletree, Darnley &amp; Co. </span>
      <span id="f8367">was lost in the din. </span>
      <span id="f8368"> Besides, that publishing firm did not own a magazine wherewith to make its claim less modest.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8369">The newspapers calculated Martin&#39;s royalties. </span>
      <span id="f8370"> In some way the magnificent offers certain magazines had made him leaked out, and Oakland ministers called upon him in a friendly way, while professional begging letters began to clutter his mail. </span>
      <span id="f8371"> But worse than all this were the women. </span>
      <span id="f8372"> His photographs were published broadcast, and special writers exploited his strong, bronzed face, his scars, his heavy shoulders, his clear, quiet eyes, and the slight hollows in his cheeks like an ascetic&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f8373"> At this last he remembered his wild youth and smiled. </span>
      <span id="f8374"> Often, among the women he met, he would see now one, now another, looking at him, appraising him, selecting him. </span>
      <span id="f8375"> He laughed to himself. </span>
      <span id="f8376"> He remembered Brissenden&#39;s warning and laughed again. </span>
      <span id="f8377"> The women would never destroy him, that much was certain. </span>
      <span id="f8378"> He had gone past that stage.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8379">Once, walking with Lizzie toward night school, she caught a glance directed toward him by a well-gowned, handsome woman of the bourgeoisie. </span>
      <span id="f8380">The glance was a trifle too long, a shade too considerative. </span>
      <span id="f8381"> Lizzie knew it for what it was, and her body tensed angrily. </span>
      <span id="f8382"> Martin noticed, noticed the cause of it, told her how used he was becoming to it and that he did not care anyway.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8383">&#34;You ought to care,&#34; she answered with blazing eyes. </span>
      <span id="f8384"> &#34;You&#39;re sick. </span>
      <span id="f8385">That&#39;s what&#39;s the matter.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8386">&#34;Never healthier in my life. </span>
      <span id="f8387"> I weigh five pounds more than I ever did.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8388">&#34;It ain&#39;t your body. </span>
      <span id="f8389"> It&#39;s your head. </span>
      <span id="f8390"> Something&#39;s wrong with your think- machine. </span>
      <span id="f8391"> Even I can see that, an&#39; I ain&#39;t nobody.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8392">He walked on beside her, reflecting.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8393">&#34;I&#39;d give anything to see you get over it,&#34; she broke out impulsively. </span>
      <span id="f8394">&#34;You ought to care when women look at you that way, a man like you. </span>
      <span id="f8395"> It&#39;s not natural. </span>
      <span id="f8396"> It&#39;s all right enough for sissy-boys. </span>
      <span id="f8397"> But you ain&#39;t made that way. </span>
      <span id="f8398"> So help me, I&#39;d be willing an&#39; glad if the right woman came along an&#39; made you care.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8399">When he left Lizzie at night school, he returned to the Metropole.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8400">Once in his rooms, he dropped into a Morris chair and sat staring straight before him. </span>
      <span id="f8401"> He did not doze. </span>
      <span id="f8402"> Nor did he think. </span>
      <span id="f8403"> His mind was a blank, save for the intervals when unsummoned memory pictures took form and color and radiance just under his eyelids. </span>
      <span id="f8404"> He saw these pictures, but he was scarcely conscious of them--no more so than if they had been dreams. </span>
      <span id="f8405"> Yet he was not asleep. </span>
      <span id="f8406"> Once, he roused himself and glanced at his watch. </span>
      <span id="f8407"> It was just eight o&#39;clock. </span>
      <span id="f8408"> He had nothing to do, and it was too early for bed. </span>
      <span id="f8409"> Then his mind went blank again, and the pictures began to form and vanish under his eyelids. </span>
      <span id="f8410"> There was nothing distinctive about the pictures. </span>
      <span id="f8411"> They were always masses of leaves and shrub-like branches shot through with hot sunshine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8412">A knock at the door aroused him. </span>
      <span id="f8413"> He was not asleep, and his mind immediately connected the knock with a telegram, or letter, or perhaps one of the servants bringing back clean clothes from the laundry. </span>
      <span id="f8414"> He was thinking about Joe and wondering where he was, as he said, &#34;Come in.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8415">He was still thinking about Joe, and did not turn toward the door. </span>
      <span id="f8416"> He heard it close softly. </span>
      <span id="f8417"> There was a long silence. </span>
      <span id="f8418"> He forgot that there had been a knock at the door, and was still staring blankly before him when he heard a woman&#39;s sob. </span>
      <span id="f8419"> It was involuntary, spasmodic, checked, and stifled--he noted that as he turned about. </span>
      <span id="f8420"> The next instant he was on his feet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8421">&#34;Ruth!&#34; he said, amazed and bewildered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8422">Her face was white and strained. </span>
      <span id="f8423"> She stood just inside the door, one hand against it for support, the other pressed to her side. </span>
      <span id="f8424"> She extended both hands toward him piteously, and started forward to meet him. </span>
      <span id="f8425"> As he caught her hands and led her to the Morris chair he noticed how cold they were. </span>
      <span id="f8426"> He drew up another chair and sat down on the broad arm of it. </span>
      <span id="f8427"> He was too confused to speak. </span>
      <span id="f8428"> In his own mind his affair with Ruth was closed and sealed. </span>
      <span id="f8429"> He felt much in the same way that he would have felt had the Shelly Hot Springs Laundry suddenly invaded the Hotel Metropole with a whole week&#39;s washing ready for him to pitch into. </span>
      <span id="f8430"> Several times he was about to speak, and each time he hesitated.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8431">&#34;No one knows I am here,&#34; Ruth said in a faint voice, with an appealing smile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8432">&#34;What did you say?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8433">He was surprised at the sound of his own voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8434">She repeated her words.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8435">&#34;Oh,&#34; he said, then wondered what more he could possibly say.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8436">&#34;I saw you come in, and I waited a few minutes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8437">&#34;Oh,&#34; he said again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8438">He had never been so tongue-tied in his life. </span>
      <span id="f8439"> Positively he did not have an idea in his head. </span>
      <span id="f8440"> He felt stupid and awkward, but for the life of him he could think of nothing to say. </span>
      <span id="f8441"> It would have been easier had the intrusion been the Shelly Hot Springs laundry. </span>
      <span id="f8442"> He could have rolled up his sleeves and gone to work.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8443">&#34;And then you came in,&#34; he said finally.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8444">She nodded, with a slightly arch expression, and loosened the scarf at her throat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8445">&#34;I saw you first from across the street when you were with that girl.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8446">&#34;Oh, yes,&#34; he said simply. </span>
      <span id="f8447"> &#34;I took her down to night school.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8448">&#34;Well, aren&#39;t you glad to see me?&#34; she said at the end of another silence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8449">&#34;Yes, yes.&#34;  He spoke hastily. </span>
      <span id="f8450"> &#34;But wasn&#39;t it rash of you to come here?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8451">&#34;I slipped in. </span>
      <span id="f8452"> Nobody knows I am here. </span>
      <span id="f8453"> I wanted to see you. </span>
      <span id="f8454"> I came to tell you I have been very foolish. </span>
      <span id="f8455"> I came because I could no longer stay away, because my heart compelled me to come, because--because I wanted to come.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8456">She came forward, out of her chair and over to him. </span>
      <span id="f8457"> She rested her hand on his shoulder a moment, breathing quickly, and then slipped into his arms. </span>
      <span id="f8458"> And in his large, easy way, desirous of not inflicting hurt, knowing that to repulse this proffer of herself was to inflict the most grievous hurt a woman could receive, he folded his arms around her and held her close. </span>
      <span id="f8459"> But there was no warmth in the embrace, no caress in the contact. </span>
      <span id="f8460"> She had come into his arms, and he held her, that was all. </span>
      <span id="f8461"> She nestled against him, and then, with a change of position, her hands crept up and rested upon his neck. </span>
      <span id="f8462"> But his flesh was not fire beneath those hands, and he felt awkward and uncomfortable.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8463">&#34;What makes you tremble so?&#34; he asked. </span>
      <span id="f8464"> &#34;Is it a chill? </span>
      <span id="f8465"> Shall I light the grate?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8466">He made a movement to disengage himself, but she clung more closely to him, shivering violently.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8467">&#34;It is merely nervousness,&#34; she said with chattering teeth. </span>
      <span id="f8468"> &#34;I&#39;ll control myself in a minute. </span>
      <span id="f8469"> There, I am better already.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8470">Slowly her shivering died away. </span>
      <span id="f8471"> He continued to hold her, but he was no longer puzzled. </span>
      <span id="f8472"> He knew now for what she had come.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8473">&#34;My mother wanted me to marry Charley Hapgood,&#34; she announced.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8474">&#34;Charley Hapgood, that fellow who speaks always in platitudes?&#34; Martin groaned. </span>
      <span id="f8475"> Then he added, &#34;And now, I suppose, your mother wants you to marry me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8476">He did not put it in the form of a question. </span>
      <span id="f8477"> He stated it as a certitude, and before his eyes began to dance the rows of figures of his royalties.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8478">&#34;She will not object, I know that much,&#34; Ruth said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8479">&#34;She considers me quite eligible?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8480">Ruth nodded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8481">&#34;And yet I am not a bit more eligible now than I was when she broke our engagement,&#34; he meditated. </span>
      <span id="f8482"> &#34;I haven&#39;t changed any. </span>
      <span id="f8483"> I&#39;m the same Martin Eden, though for that matter I&#39;m a bit worse--I smoke now. </span>
      <span id="f8484"> Don&#39;t you smell my breath?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8485">In reply she pressed her open fingers against his lips, placed them graciously and playfully, and in expectancy of the kiss that of old had always been a consequence. </span>
      <span id="f8486"> But there was no caressing answer of Martin&#39;s lips. </span>
      <span id="f8487"> He waited until the fingers were removed and then went on.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8488">&#34;I am not changed. </span>
      <span id="f8489"> I haven&#39;t got a job. </span>
      <span id="f8490"> I&#39;m not looking for a job. </span>
      <span id="f8491">Furthermore, I am not going to look for a job. </span>
      <span id="f8492"> And I still believe that Herbert Spencer is a great and noble man and that Judge Blount is an unmitigated ass. </span>
      <span id="f8493"> I had dinner with him the other night, so I ought to know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8494">&#34;But you didn&#39;t accept father&#39;s invitation,&#34; she chided.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8495">&#34;So you know about that? </span>
      <span id="f8496"> Who sent him? </span>
      <span id="f8497"> Your mother?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8498">She remained silent.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8499">&#34;Then she did send him. </span>
      <span id="f8500"> I thought so. </span>
      <span id="f8501"> And now I suppose she has sent you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8502">&#34;No one knows that I am here,&#34; she protested. </span>
      <span id="f8503"> &#34;Do you think my mother would permit this?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8504">&#34;She&#39;d permit you to marry me, that&#39;s certain.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8505">She gave a sharp cry. </span>
      <span id="f8506"> &#34;Oh, Martin, don&#39;t be cruel. </span>
      <span id="f8507"> You have not kissed me once. </span>
      <span id="f8508"> You are as unresponsive as a stone. </span>
      <span id="f8509"> And think what I have dared to do.&#34;  She looked about her with a shiver, though half the look was curiosity. </span>
      <span id="f8510"> &#34;Just think of where I am.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8511">&#34;_I could die for you! </span>
      <span id="f8512"> I could die for you_!&#34;--Lizzie&#39;s words were ringing in his ears.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8513">&#34;Why didn&#39;t you dare it before?&#34; he asked harshly. </span>
      <span id="f8514"> &#34;When I hadn&#39;t a job? </span>
      <span id="f8515">When I was starving? </span>
      <span id="f8516"> When I was just as I am now, as a man, as an artist, the same Martin Eden? </span>
      <span id="f8517"> That&#39;s the question I&#39;ve been propounding to myself for many a day--not concerning you merely, but concerning everybody. </span>
      <span id="f8518"> You see I have not changed, though my sudden apparent appreciation in value compels me constantly to reassure myself on that point. </span>
      <span id="f8519"> I&#39;ve got the same flesh on my bones, the same ten fingers and toes. </span>
      <span id="f8520"> I am the same. </span>
      <span id="f8521"> I have not developed any new strength nor virtue. </span>
      <span id="f8522">My brain is the same old brain. </span>
      <span id="f8523"> I haven&#39;t made even one new generalization on literature or philosophy. </span>
      <span id="f8524"> I am personally of the same value that I was when nobody wanted me. </span>
      <span id="f8525"> And what is puzzling me is why they want me now. </span>
      <span id="f8526"> Surely they don&#39;t want me for myself, for myself is the same old self they did not want. </span>
      <span id="f8527"> Then they must want me for something else, for something that is outside of me, for something that is not I! </span>
      <span id="f8528"> Shall I tell you what that something is? </span>
      <span id="f8529"> It is for the recognition I have received. </span>
      <span id="f8530"> That recognition is not I. </span>
      <span id="f8531"> It resides in the minds of others. </span>
      <span id="f8532"> Then again for the money I have earned and am earning. </span>
      <span id="f8533"> But that money is not I. </span>
      <span id="f8534"> It resides in banks and in the pockets of Tom, Dick, and Harry. </span>
      <span id="f8535"> And is it for that, for the recognition and the money, that you now want me?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8536">&#34;You are breaking my heart,&#34; she sobbed. </span>
      <span id="f8537"> &#34;You know I love you, that I am here because I love you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8538">&#34;I am afraid you don&#39;t see my point,&#34; he said gently. </span>
      <span id="f8539"> &#34;What I mean is: if you love me, how does it happen that you love me now so much more than you did when your love was weak enough to deny me?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8540">&#34;Forget and forgive,&#34; she cried passionately. </span>
      <span id="f8541"> &#34;I loved you all the time, remember that, and I am here, now, in your arms.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8542">&#34;I&#39;m afraid I am a shrewd merchant, peering into the scales, trying to weigh your love and find out what manner of thing it is.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8543">She withdrew herself from his arms, sat upright, and looked at him long and searchingly. </span>
      <span id="f8544"> She was about to speak, then faltered and changed her mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8545">&#34;You see, it appears this way to me,&#34; he went on. </span>
      <span id="f8546"> &#34;When I was all that I am now, nobody out of my own class seemed to care for me. </span>
      <span id="f8547"> When my books were all written, no one who had read the manuscripts seemed to care for them. </span>
      <span id="f8548"> In point of fact, because of the stuff I had written they seemed to care even less for me. </span>
      <span id="f8549"> In writing the stuff it seemed that I had committed acts that were, to say the least, derogatory. </span>
      <span id="f8550"> &#39;Get a job,&#39; everybody said.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8551">She made a movement of dissent.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8552">&#34;Yes, yes,&#34; he said; &#34;except in your case you told me to get a position. </span>
      <span id="f8553">The homely word _job_, like much that I have written, offends you. </span>
      <span id="f8554"> It is brutal. </span>
      <span id="f8555"> But I assure you it was no less brutal to me when everybody I knew recommended it to me as they would recommend right conduct to an immoral creature. </span>
      <span id="f8556"> But to return. </span>
      <span id="f8557"> The publication of what I had written, and the public notice I received, wrought a change in the fibre of your love. </span>
      <span id="f8558"> Martin Eden, with his work all performed, you would not marry. </span>
      <span id="f8559">Your love for him was not strong enough to enable you to marry him. </span>
      <span id="f8560"> But your love is now strong enough, and I cannot avoid the conclusion that its strength arises from the publication and the public notice. </span>
      <span id="f8561"> In your case I do not mention royalties, though I am certain that they apply to the change wrought in your mother and father. </span>
      <span id="f8562"> Of course, all this is not flattering to me. </span>
      <span id="f8563"> But worst of all, it makes me question love, sacred love. </span>
      <span id="f8564"> Is love so gross a thing that it must feed upon publication and public notice? </span>
      <span id="f8565"> It would seem so. </span>
      <span id="f8566"> I have sat and thought upon it till my head went around.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8567">&#34;Poor, dear head.&#34;  She reached up a hand and passed the fingers soothingly through his hair. </span>
      <span id="f8568"> &#34;Let it go around no more. </span>
      <span id="f8569"> Let us begin anew, now. </span>
      <span id="f8570"> I loved you all the time. </span>
      <span id="f8571"> I know that I was weak in yielding to my mother&#39;s will. </span>
      <span id="f8572"> I should not have done so. </span>
      <span id="f8573"> Yet I have heard you speak so often with broad charity of the fallibility and frailty of humankind. </span>
      <span id="f8574"> Extend that charity to me. </span>
      <span id="f8575"> I acted mistakenly. </span>
      <span id="f8576"> Forgive me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8577">&#34;Oh, I do forgive,&#34; he said impatiently. </span>
      <span id="f8578"> &#34;It is easy to forgive where there is really nothing to forgive. </span>
      <span id="f8579"> Nothing that you have done requires forgiveness. </span>
      <span id="f8580"> One acts according to one&#39;s lights, and more than that one cannot do. </span>
      <span id="f8581"> As well might I ask you to forgive me for my not getting a job.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8582">&#34;I meant well,&#34; she protested. </span>
      <span id="f8583"> &#34;You know that I could not have loved you and not meant well.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8584">&#34;True; but you would have destroyed me out of your well-meaning.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8585">&#34;Yes, yes,&#34; he shut off her attempted objection. </span>
      <span id="f8586"> &#34;You would have destroyed my writing and my career. </span>
      <span id="f8587"> Realism is imperative to my nature, and the bourgeois spirit hates realism. </span>
      <span id="f8588"> The bourgeoisie is cowardly. </span>
      <span id="f8589"> It is afraid of life. </span>
      <span id="f8590"> And all your effort was to make me afraid of life. </span>
      <span id="f8591">You would have formalized me. </span>
      <span id="f8592"> You would have compressed me into a two-by- four pigeonhole of life, where all life&#39;s values are unreal, and false, and vulgar.&#34;  He felt her stir protestingly. </span>
      <span id="f8593"> &#34;Vulgarity--a hearty vulgarity, I&#39;ll admit--is the basis of bourgeois refinement and culture. </span>
      <span id="f8594">As I say, you wanted to formalize me, to make me over into one of your own class, with your class-ideals, class-values, and class-prejudices.&#34; He shook his head sadly. </span>
      <span id="f8595"> &#34;And you do not understand, even now, what I am saying. </span>
      <span id="f8596"> My words do not mean to you what I endeavor to make them mean. </span>
      <span id="f8597">What I say is so much fantasy to you. </span>
      <span id="f8598"> Yet to me it is vital reality. </span>
      <span id="f8599"> At the best you are a trifle puzzled and amused that this raw boy, crawling up out of the mire of the abyss, should pass judgment upon your class and call it vulgar.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8600">She leaned her head wearily against his shoulder, and her body shivered with recurrent nervousness. </span>
      <span id="f8601"> He waited for a time for her to speak, and then went on.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8602">&#34;And now you want to renew our love. </span>
      <span id="f8603"> You want us to be married. </span>
      <span id="f8604"> You want me. </span>
      <span id="f8605"> And yet, listen--if my books had not been noticed, I&#39;d nevertheless have been just what I am now. </span>
      <span id="f8606"> And you would have stayed away. </span>
      <span id="f8607"> It is all those damned books--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8608">&#34;Don&#39;t swear,&#34; she interrupted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8609">Her reproof startled him. </span>
      <span id="f8610"> He broke into a harsh laugh.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8611">&#34;That&#39;s it,&#34; he said, &#34;at a high moment, when what seems your life&#39;s happiness is at stake, you are afraid of life in the same old way--afraid of life and a healthy oath.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8612">She was stung by his words into realization of the puerility of her act, and yet she felt that he had magnified it unduly and was consequently resentful. </span>
      <span id="f8613"> They sat in silence for a long time, she thinking desperately and he pondering upon his love which had departed. </span>
      <span id="f8614"> He knew, now, that he had not really loved her. </span>
      <span id="f8615"> It was an idealized Ruth he had loved, an ethereal creature of his own creating, the bright and luminous spirit of his love-poems. </span>
      <span id="f8616"> The real bourgeois Ruth, with all the bourgeois failings and with the hopeless cramp of the bourgeois psychology in her mind, he had never loved.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8617">She suddenly began to speak.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8618">&#34;I know that much you have said is so. </span>
      <span id="f8619"> I have been afraid of life. </span>
      <span id="f8620"> I did not love you well enough. </span>
      <span id="f8621"> I have learned to love better. </span>
      <span id="f8622"> I love you for what you are, for what you were, for the ways even by which you have become. </span>
      <span id="f8623"> I love you for the ways wherein you differ from what you call my class, for your beliefs which I do not understand but which I know I can come to understand. </span>
      <span id="f8624"> I shall devote myself to understanding them. </span>
      <span id="f8625"> And even your smoking and your swearing--they are part of you and I will love you for them, too. </span>
      <span id="f8626"> I can still learn. </span>
      <span id="f8627"> In the last ten minutes I have learned much. </span>
      <span id="f8628"> That I have dared to come here is a token of what I have already learned. </span>
      <span id="f8629"> Oh, Martin!--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8630">She was sobbing and nestling close against him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8631">For the first time his arms folded her gently and with sympathy, and she acknowledged it with a happy movement and a brightening face.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8632">&#34;It is too late,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f8633"> He remembered Lizzie&#39;s words. </span>
      <span id="f8634"> &#34;I am a sick man--oh, not my body. </span>
      <span id="f8635"> It is my soul, my brain. </span>
      <span id="f8636"> I seem to have lost all values. </span>
      <span id="f8637"> I care for nothing. </span>
      <span id="f8638"> If you had been this way a few months ago, it would have been different. </span>
      <span id="f8639"> It is too late, now.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8640">&#34;It is not too late,&#34; she cried. </span>
      <span id="f8641"> &#34;I will show you. </span>
      <span id="f8642"> I will prove to you that my love has grown, that it is greater to me than my class and all that is dearest to me. </span>
      <span id="f8643"> All that is dearest to the bourgeoisie I will flout. </span>
      <span id="f8644"> I am no longer afraid of life. </span>
      <span id="f8645"> I will leave my father and mother, and let my name become a by-word with my friends. </span>
      <span id="f8646"> I will come to you here and now, in free love if you will, and I will be proud and glad to be with you. </span>
      <span id="f8647"> If I have been a traitor to love, I will now, for love&#39;s sake, be a traitor to all that made that earlier treason.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8648">She stood before him, with shining eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8649">&#34;I am waiting, Martin,&#34; she whispered, &#34;waiting for you to accept me. </span>
      <span id="f8650">Look at me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8651">It was splendid, he thought, looking at her. </span>
      <span id="f8652"> She had redeemed herself for all that she had lacked, rising up at last, true woman, superior to the iron rule of bourgeois convention. </span>
      <span id="f8653"> It was splendid, magnificent, desperate. </span>
      <span id="f8654"> And yet, what was the matter with him? </span>
      <span id="f8655"> He was not thrilled nor stirred by what she had done. </span>
      <span id="f8656"> It was splendid and magnificent only intellectually. </span>
      <span id="f8657"> In what should have been a moment of fire, he coldly appraised her. </span>
      <span id="f8658"> His heart was untouched. </span>
      <span id="f8659"> He was unaware of any desire for her. </span>
      <span id="f8660"> Again he remembered Lizzie&#39;s words.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8661">&#34;I am sick, very sick,&#34; he said with a despairing gesture. </span>
      <span id="f8662"> &#34;How sick I did not know till now. </span>
      <span id="f8663"> Something has gone out of me. </span>
      <span id="f8664"> I have always been unafraid of life, but I never dreamed of being sated with life. </span>
      <span id="f8665"> Life has so filled me that I am empty of any desire for anything. </span>
      <span id="f8666"> If there were room, I should want you, now. </span>
      <span id="f8667"> You see how sick I am.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8668">He leaned his head back and closed his eyes; and like a child, crying, that forgets its grief in watching the sunlight percolate through the tear-dimmed films over the pupils, so Martin forgot his sickness, the presence of Ruth, everything, in watching the masses of vegetation, shot through hotly with sunshine that took form and blazed against this background of his eyelids. </span>
      <span id="f8669"> It was not restful, that green foliage. </span>
      <span id="f8670"> The sunlight was too raw and glaring. </span>
      <span id="f8671"> It hurt him to look at it, and yet he looked, he knew not why.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8672">He was brought back to himself by the rattle of the door-knob. </span>
      <span id="f8673"> Ruth was at the door.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8674">&#34;How shall I get out?&#34; she questioned tearfully. </span>
      <span id="f8675"> &#34;I am afraid.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8676">&#34;Oh, forgive me,&#34; he cried, springing to his feet. </span>
      <span id="f8677"> &#34;I&#39;m not myself, you know. </span>
      <span id="f8678"> I forgot you were here.&#34;  He put his hand to his head. </span>
      <span id="f8679"> &#34;You see, I&#39;m not just right. </span>
      <span id="f8680"> I&#39;ll take you home. </span>
      <span id="f8681"> We can go out by the servants&#39; entrance. </span>
      <span id="f8682"> No one will see us. </span>
      <span id="f8683"> Pull down that veil and everything will be all right.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8684">She clung to his arm through the dim-lighted passages and down the narrow stairs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8685">&#34;I am safe now,&#34; she said, when they emerged on the sidewalk, at the same time starting to take her hand from his arm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8686">&#34;No, no, I&#39;ll see you home,&#34; he answered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8687">&#34;No, please don&#39;t,&#34; she objected. </span>
      <span id="f8688"> &#34;It is unnecessary.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8689">Again she started to remove her hand. </span>
      <span id="f8690"> He felt a momentary curiosity. </span>
      <span id="f8691"> Now that she was out of danger she was afraid. </span>
      <span id="f8692"> She was in almost a panic to be quit of him. </span>
      <span id="f8693"> He could see no reason for it and attributed it to her nervousness. </span>
      <span id="f8694"> So he restrained her withdrawing hand and started to walk on with her. </span>
      <span id="f8695"> Halfway down the block, he saw a man in a long overcoat shrink back into a doorway. </span>
      <span id="f8696"> He shot a glance in as he passed by, and, despite the high turned-up collar, he was certain that he recognized Ruth&#39;s brother, Norman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8697">During the walk Ruth and Martin held little conversation. </span>
      <span id="f8698"> She was stunned. </span>
      <span id="f8699"> He was apathetic. </span>
      <span id="f8700"> Once, he mentioned that he was going away, back to the South Seas, and, once, she asked him to forgive her having come to him. </span>
      <span id="f8701"> And that was all. </span>
      <span id="f8702"> The parting at her door was conventional. </span>
      <span id="f8703"> They shook hands, said good night, and he lifted his hat. </span>
      <span id="f8704">The door swung shut, and he lighted a cigarette and turned back for his hotel. </span>
      <span id="f8705"> When he came to the doorway into which he had seen Norman shrink, he stopped and looked in in a speculative humor.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8706">&#34;She lied,&#34; he said aloud. </span>
      <span id="f8707"> &#34;She made believe to me that she had dared greatly, and all the while she knew the brother that brought her was waiting to take her back.&#34;  He burst into laughter. </span>
      <span id="f8708"> &#34;Oh, these bourgeois! </span>
      <span id="f8709"> When I was broke, I was not fit to be seen with his sister. </span>
      <span id="f8710">When I have a bank account, he brings her to me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8711">As he swung on his heel to go on, a tramp, going in the same direction, begged him over his shoulder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8712">&#34;Say, mister, can you give me a quarter to get a bed?&#34; were the words.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8713">But it was the voice that made Martin turn around. </span>
      <span id="f8714"> The next instant he had Joe by the hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8715">&#34;D&#39;ye remember that time we parted at the Hot Springs?&#34; the other was saying. </span>
      <span id="f8716"> &#34;I said then we&#39;d meet again. </span>
      <span id="f8717"> I felt it in my bones. </span>
      <span id="f8718"> An&#39; here we are.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8719">&#34;You&#39;re looking good,&#34; Martin said admiringly, &#34;and you&#39;ve put on weight.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8720">&#34;I sure have.&#34;  Joe&#39;s face was beaming. </span>
      <span id="f8721"> &#34;I never knew what it was to live till I hit hoboin&#39;. </span>
      <span id="f8722"> I&#39;m thirty pounds heavier an&#39; feel tiptop all the time. </span>
      <span id="f8723"> Why, I was worked to skin an&#39; bone in them old days. </span>
      <span id="f8724"> Hoboin&#39; sure agrees with me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8725">&#34;But you&#39;re looking for a bed just the same,&#34; Martin chided, &#34;and it&#39;s a cold night.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8726">&#34;Huh? </span>
      <span id="f8727"> Lookin&#39; for a bed?&#34;  Joe shot a hand into his hip pocket and brought it out filled with small change. </span>
      <span id="f8728"> &#34;That beats hard graft,&#34; he exulted. </span>
      <span id="f8729"> &#34;You just looked good; that&#39;s why I battered you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8730">Martin laughed and gave in.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8731">&#34;You&#39;ve several full-sized drunks right there,&#34; he insinuated.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8732">Joe slid the money back into his pocket.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8733">&#34;Not in mine,&#34; he announced. </span>
      <span id="f8734"> &#34;No gettin&#39; oryide for me, though there ain&#39;t nothin&#39; to stop me except I don&#39;t want to. </span>
      <span id="f8735"> I&#39;ve ben drunk once since I seen you last, an&#39; then it was unexpected, bein&#39; on an empty stomach. </span>
      <span id="f8736"> When I work like a beast, I drink like a beast. </span>
      <span id="f8737"> When I live like a man, I drink like a man--a jolt now an&#39; again when I feel like it, an&#39; that&#39;s all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8738">Martin arranged to meet him next day, and went on to the hotel. </span>
      <span id="f8739"> He paused in the office to look up steamer sailings. </span>
      <span id="f8740"> The Mariposa sailed for Tahiti in five days.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8741">&#34;Telephone over to-morrow and reserve a stateroom for me,&#34; he told the clerk. </span>
      <span id="f8742"> &#34;No deck-stateroom, but down below, on the weather-side,--the port-side, remember that, the port-side. </span>
      <span id="f8743"> You&#39;d better write it down.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8744">Once in his room he got into bed and slipped off to sleep as gently as a child. </span>
      <span id="f8745"> The occurrences of the evening had made no impression on him. </span>
      <span id="f8746"> His mind was dead to impressions. </span>
      <span id="f8747"> The glow of warmth with which he met Joe had been most fleeting. </span>
      <span id="f8748"> The succeeding minute he had been bothered by the ex-laundryman&#39;s presence and by the compulsion of conversation. </span>
      <span id="f8749"> That in five more days he sailed for his loved South Seas meant nothing to him. </span>
      <span id="f8750"> So he closed his eyes and slept normally and comfortably for eight uninterrupted hours. </span>
      <span id="f8751"> He was not restless. </span>
      <span id="f8752"> He did not change his position, nor did he dream. </span>
      <span id="f8753"> Sleep had become to him oblivion, and each day that he awoke, he awoke with regret. </span>
      <span id="f8754"> Life worried and bored him, and time was a vexation.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>