<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f8755">CHAPTER XLVI</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f8756">&#34;Say, Joe,&#34; was his greeting to his old-time working-mate next morning, &#34;there&#39;s a Frenchman out on Twenty-eighth Street. </span>
      <span id="f8757"> He&#39;s made a pot of money, and he&#39;s going back to France. </span>
      <span id="f8758"> It&#39;s a dandy, well-appointed, small steam laundry. </span>
      <span id="f8759"> There&#39;s a start for you if you want to settle down. </span>
      <span id="f8760">Here, take this; buy some clothes with it and be at this man&#39;s office by ten o&#39;clock. </span>
      <span id="f8761"> He looked up the laundry for me, and he&#39;ll take you out and show you around. </span>
      <span id="f8762"> If you like it, and think it is worth the price--twelve thousand--let me know and it is yours. </span>
      <span id="f8763"> Now run along. </span>
      <span id="f8764"> I&#39;m busy. </span>
      <span id="f8765"> I&#39;ll see you later.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8766">&#34;Now look here, Mart,&#34; the other said slowly, with kindling anger, &#34;I come here this mornin&#39; to see you. </span>
      <span id="f8767"> Savve? </span>
      <span id="f8768"> I didn&#39;t come here to get no laundry. </span>
      <span id="f8769"> I come a here for a talk for old friends&#39; sake, and you shove a laundry at me. </span>
      <span id="f8770"> I tell you, what you can do. </span>
      <span id="f8771"> You can take that laundry an&#39; go to hell.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8772">He was out of the room when Martin caught him and whirled him around.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8773">&#34;Now look here, Joe,&#34; he said; &#34;if you act that way, I&#39;ll punch your head. </span>
      <span id="f8774"> An for old friends&#39; sake I&#39;ll punch it hard. </span>
      <span id="f8775"> Savve?--you will, will you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8776">Joe had clinched and attempted to throw him, and he was twisting and writhing out of the advantage of the other&#39;s hold. </span>
      <span id="f8777"> They reeled about the room, locked in each other&#39;s arms, and came down with a crash across the splintered wreckage of a wicker chair. </span>
      <span id="f8778"> Joe was underneath, with arms spread out and held and with Martin&#39;s knee on his chest. </span>
      <span id="f8779"> He was panting and gasping for breath when Martin released him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8780">&#34;Now we&#39;ll talk a moment,&#34; Martin said. </span>
      <span id="f8781"> &#34;You can&#39;t get fresh with me. </span>
      <span id="f8782"> I want that laundry business finished first of all. </span>
      <span id="f8783"> Then you can come back and we&#39;ll talk for old sake&#39;s sake. </span>
      <span id="f8784"> I told you I was busy. </span>
      <span id="f8785"> Look at that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8786">A servant had just come in with the morning mail, a great mass of letters and magazines.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8787">&#34;How can I wade through that and talk with you? </span>
      <span id="f8788"> You go and fix up that laundry, and then we&#39;ll get together.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8789">&#34;All right,&#34; Joe admitted reluctantly. </span>
      <span id="f8790"> &#34;I thought you was turnin&#39; me down, but I guess I was mistaken. </span>
      <span id="f8791"> But you can&#39;t lick me, Mart, in a stand-up fight. </span>
      <span id="f8792"> I&#39;ve got the reach on you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8793">&#34;We&#39;ll put on the gloves sometime and see,&#34; Martin said with a smile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8794">&#34;Sure; as soon as I get that laundry going.&#34;  Joe extended his arm. </span>
      <span id="f8795"> &#34;You see that reach? </span>
      <span id="f8796"> It&#39;ll make you go a few.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8797">Martin heaved a sigh of relief when the door closed behind the laundryman. </span>
      <span id="f8798"> He was becoming anti-social. </span>
      <span id="f8799"> Daily he found it a severer strain to be decent with people. </span>
      <span id="f8800"> Their presence perturbed him, and the effort of conversation irritated him. </span>
      <span id="f8801"> They made him restless, and no sooner was he in contact with them than he was casting about for excuses to get rid of them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8802">He did not proceed to attack his mail, and for a half hour he lolled in his chair, doing nothing, while no more than vague, half-formed thoughts occasionally filtered through his intelligence, or rather, at wide intervals, themselves constituted the flickering of his intelligence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8803">He roused himself and began glancing through his mail. </span>
      <span id="f8804"> There were a dozen requests for autographs--he knew them at sight; there were professional begging letters; and there were letters from cranks, ranging from the man with a working model of perpetual motion, and the man who demonstrated that the surface of the earth was the inside of a hollow sphere, to the man seeking financial aid to purchase the Peninsula of Lower California for the purpose of communist colonization. </span>
      <span id="f8805"> There were letters from women seeking to know him, and over one such he smiled, for enclosed was her receipt for pew-rent, sent as evidence of her good faith and as proof of her respectability.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8806">Editors and publishers contributed to the daily heap of letters, the former on their knees for his manuscripts, the latter on their knees for his books--his poor disdained manuscripts that had kept all he possessed in pawn for so many dreary months in order to fund them in postage. </span>
      <span id="f8807"> There were unexpected checks for English serial rights and for advance payments on foreign translations. </span>
      <span id="f8808"> His English agent announced the sale of German translation rights in three of his books, and informed him that Swedish editions, from which he could expect nothing because Sweden was not a party to the Berne Convention, were already on the market. </span>
      <span id="f8809"> Then there was a nominal request for his permission for a Russian translation, that country being likewise outside the Berne Convention.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8810">He turned to the huge bundle of clippings which had come in from his press bureau, and read about himself and his vogue, which had become a furore. </span>
      <span id="f8811"> All his creative output had been flung to the public in one magnificent sweep. </span>
      <span id="f8812"> That seemed to account for it. </span>
      <span id="f8813"> He had taken the public off its feet, the way Kipling had, that time when he lay near to death and all the mob, animated by a mob-mind thought, began suddenly to read him. </span>
      <span id="f8814"> Martin remembered how that same world-mob, having read him and acclaimed him and not understood him in the least, had, abruptly, a few months later, flung itself upon him and torn him to pieces. </span>
      <span id="f8815"> Martin grinned at the thought. </span>
      <span id="f8816"> Who was he that he should not be similarly treated in a few more months? </span>
      <span id="f8817"> Well, he would fool the mob. </span>
      <span id="f8818"> He would be away, in the South Seas, building his grass house, trading for pearls and copra, jumping reefs in frail outriggers, catching sharks and bonitas, hunting wild goats among the cliffs of the valley that lay next to the valley of Taiohae.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8819">In the moment of that thought the desperateness of his situation dawned upon him. </span>
      <span id="f8820"> He saw, cleared eyed, that he was in the Valley of the Shadow. </span>
      <span id="f8821">All the life that was in him was fading, fainting, making toward death.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8822">He realized how much he slept, and how much he desired to sleep. </span>
      <span id="f8823"> Of old, he had hated sleep. </span>
      <span id="f8824"> It had robbed him of precious moments of living. </span>
      <span id="f8825">Four hours of sleep in the twenty-four had meant being robbed of four hours of life. </span>
      <span id="f8826"> How he had grudged sleep! </span>
      <span id="f8827"> Now it was life he grudged. </span>
      <span id="f8828">Life was not good; its taste in his mouth was without tang, and bitter. </span>
      <span id="f8829">This was his peril. </span>
      <span id="f8830"> Life that did not yearn toward life was in fair way toward ceasing. </span>
      <span id="f8831"> Some remote instinct for preservation stirred in him, and he knew he must get away. </span>
      <span id="f8832"> He glanced about the room, and the thought of packing was burdensome. </span>
      <span id="f8833"> Perhaps it would be better to leave that to the last. </span>
      <span id="f8834"> In the meantime he might be getting an outfit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8835">He put on his hat and went out, stopping in at a gun-store, where he spent the remainder of the morning buying automatic rifles, ammunition, and fishing tackle. </span>
      <span id="f8836"> Fashions changed in trading, and he knew he would have to wait till he reached Tahiti before ordering his trade-goods. </span>
      <span id="f8837"> They could come up from Australia, anyway. </span>
      <span id="f8838"> This solution was a source of pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f8839"> He had avoided doing something, and the doing of anything just now was unpleasant. </span>
      <span id="f8840"> He went back to the hotel gladly, with a feeling of satisfaction in that the comfortable Morris chair was waiting for him; and he groaned inwardly, on entering his room, at sight of Joe in the Morris chair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8841">Joe was delighted with the laundry. </span>
      <span id="f8842"> Everything was settled, and he would enter into possession next day. </span>
      <span id="f8843"> Martin lay on the bed, with closed eyes, while the other talked on. </span>
      <span id="f8844"> Martin&#39;s thoughts were far away--so far away that he was rarely aware that he was thinking. </span>
      <span id="f8845"> It was only by an effort that he occasionally responded. </span>
      <span id="f8846"> And yet this was Joe, whom he had always liked. </span>
      <span id="f8847"> But Joe was too keen with life. </span>
      <span id="f8848"> The boisterous impact of it on Martin&#39;s jaded mind was a hurt. </span>
      <span id="f8849"> It was an aching probe to his tired sensitiveness. </span>
      <span id="f8850"> When Joe reminded him that sometime in the future they were going to put on the gloves together, he could almost have screamed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8851">&#34;Remember, Joe, you&#39;re to run the laundry according to those old rules you used to lay down at Shelly Hot Springs,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f8852"> &#34;No overworking. </span>
      <span id="f8853">No working at night. </span>
      <span id="f8854"> And no children at the mangles. </span>
      <span id="f8855"> No children anywhere. </span>
      <span id="f8856"> And a fair wage.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8857">Joe nodded and pulled out a note-book.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8858">&#34;Look at here. </span>
      <span id="f8859"> I was workin&#39; out them rules before breakfast this A.M. </span>
      <span id="f8860">What d&#39;ye think of them?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8861">He read them aloud, and Martin approved, worrying at the same time as to when Joe would take himself off.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8862">It was late afternoon when he awoke. </span>
      <span id="f8863"> Slowly the fact of life came back to him. </span>
      <span id="f8864"> He glanced about the room. </span>
      <span id="f8865"> Joe had evidently stolen away after he had dozed off. </span>
      <span id="f8866"> That was considerate of Joe, he thought. </span>
      <span id="f8867"> Then he closed his eyes and slept again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8868">In the days that followed Joe was too busy organizing and taking hold of the laundry to bother him much; and it was not until the day before sailing that the newspapers made the announcement that he had taken passage on the Mariposa. </span>
      <span id="f8869"> Once, when the instinct of preservation fluttered, he went to a doctor and underwent a searching physical examination. </span>
      <span id="f8870"> Nothing could be found the matter with him. </span>
      <span id="f8871"> His heart and lungs were pronounced magnificent. </span>
      <span id="f8872"> Every organ, so far as the doctor could know, was normal and was working normally.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8873">&#34;There is nothing the matter with you, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f8874">Eden,&#34; he said, &#34;positively nothing the matter with you. </span>
      <span id="f8875"> You are in the pink of condition. </span>
      <span id="f8876"> Candidly, I envy you your health. </span>
      <span id="f8877"> It is superb. </span>
      <span id="f8878"> Look at that chest. </span>
      <span id="f8879"> There, and in your stomach, lies the secret of your remarkable constitution. </span>
      <span id="f8880">Physically, you are a man in a thousand--in ten thousand. </span>
      <span id="f8881"> Barring accidents, you should live to be a hundred.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8882">And Martin knew that Lizzie&#39;s diagnosis had been correct. </span>
      <span id="f8883"> Physically he was all right. </span>
      <span id="f8884"> It was his &#34;think-machine&#34; that had gone wrong, and there was no cure for that except to get away to the South Seas. </span>
      <span id="f8885"> The trouble was that now, on the verge of departure, he had no desire to go. </span>
      <span id="f8886"> The South Seas charmed him no more than did bourgeois civilization. </span>
      <span id="f8887"> There was no zest in the thought of departure, while the act of departure appalled him as a weariness of the flesh. </span>
      <span id="f8888"> He would have felt better if he were already on board and gone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8889">The last day was a sore trial. </span>
      <span id="f8890"> Having read of his sailing in the morning papers, Bernard Higginbotham, Gertrude, and all the family came to say good-by, as did Hermann von Schmidt and Marian. </span>
      <span id="f8891"> Then there was business to be transacted, bills to be paid, and everlasting reporters to be endured. </span>
      <span id="f8892"> He said good-by to Lizzie Connolly, abruptly, at the entrance to night school, and hurried away. </span>
      <span id="f8893"> At the hotel he found Joe, too busy all day with the laundry to have come to him earlier. </span>
      <span id="f8894"> It was the last straw, but Martin gripped the arms of his chair and talked and listened for half an hour.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8895">&#34;You know, Joe,&#34; he said, &#34;that you are not tied down to that laundry. </span>
      <span id="f8896">There are no strings on it. </span>
      <span id="f8897"> You can sell it any time and blow the money. </span>
      <span id="f8898">Any time you get sick of it and want to hit the road, just pull out. </span>
      <span id="f8899"> Do what will make you the happiest.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8900">Joe shook his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8901">&#34;No more road in mine, thank you kindly. </span>
      <span id="f8902"> Hoboin&#39;s all right, exceptin&#39; for one thing--the girls. </span>
      <span id="f8903"> I can&#39;t help it, but I&#39;m a ladies&#39; man. </span>
      <span id="f8904"> I can&#39;t get along without &#39;em, and you&#39;ve got to get along without &#39;em when you&#39;re hoboin&#39;. </span>
      <span id="f8905"> The times I&#39;ve passed by houses where dances an&#39; parties was goin&#39; on, an&#39; heard the women laugh, an&#39; saw their white dresses and smiling faces through the windows--Gee! </span>
      <span id="f8906"> I tell you them moments was plain hell. </span>
      <span id="f8907"> I like dancin&#39; an&#39; picnics, an&#39; walking in the moonlight, an&#39; all the rest too well. </span>
      <span id="f8908"> Me for the laundry, and a good front, with big iron dollars clinkin&#39; in my jeans. </span>
      <span id="f8909"> I seen a girl already, just yesterday, and, d&#39;ye know, I&#39;m feelin&#39; already I&#39;d just as soon marry her as not. </span>
      <span id="f8910"> I&#39;ve ben whistlin&#39; all day at the thought of it. </span>
      <span id="f8911"> She&#39;s a beaut, with the kindest eyes and softest voice you ever heard. </span>
      <span id="f8912"> Me for her, you can stack on that. </span>
      <span id="f8913"> Say, why don&#39;t you get married with all this money to burn? </span>
      <span id="f8914"> You could get the finest girl in the land.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8915">Martin shook his head with a smile, but in his secret heart he was wondering why any man wanted to marry. </span>
      <span id="f8916"> It seemed an amazing and incomprehensible thing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8917">From the deck of the Mariposa, at the sailing hour, he saw Lizzie Connolly hiding in the skirts of the crowd on the wharf. </span>
      <span id="f8918"> Take her with you, came the thought. </span>
      <span id="f8919"> It is easy to be kind. </span>
      <span id="f8920"> She will be supremely happy. </span>
      <span id="f8921"> It was almost a temptation one moment, and the succeeding moment it became a terror. </span>
      <span id="f8922"> He was in a panic at the thought of it. </span>
      <span id="f8923"> His tired soul cried out in protest. </span>
      <span id="f8924"> He turned away from the rail with a groan, muttering, &#34;Man, you are too sick, you are too sick.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8925">He fled to his stateroom, where he lurked until the steamer was clear of the dock. </span>
      <span id="f8926"> In the dining saloon, at luncheon, he found himself in the place of honor, at the captain&#39;s right; and he was not long in discovering that he was the great man on board. </span>
      <span id="f8927"> But no more unsatisfactory great man ever sailed on a ship. </span>
      <span id="f8928"> He spent the afternoon in a deck-chair, with closed eyes, dozing brokenly most of the time, and in the evening went early to bed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8929">After the second day, recovered from seasickness, the full passenger list was in evidence, and the more he saw of the passengers the more he disliked them. </span>
      <span id="f8930"> Yet he knew that he did them injustice. </span>
      <span id="f8931"> They were good and kindly people, he forced himself to acknowledge, and in the moment of acknowledgment he qualified--good and kindly like all the bourgeoisie, with all the psychological cramp and intellectual futility of their kind, they bored him when they talked with him, their little superficial minds were so filled with emptiness; while the boisterous high spirits and the excessive energy of the younger people shocked him. </span>
      <span id="f8932"> They were never quiet, ceaselessly playing deck-quoits, tossing rings, promenading, or rushing to the rail with loud cries to watch the leaping porpoises and the first schools of flying fish.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8933">He slept much. </span>
      <span id="f8934"> After breakfast he sought his deck-chair with a magazine he never finished. </span>
      <span id="f8935"> The printed pages tired him. </span>
      <span id="f8936"> He puzzled that men found so much to write about, and, puzzling, dozed in his chair. </span>
      <span id="f8937"> When the gong awoke him for luncheon, he was irritated that he must awaken. </span>
      <span id="f8938">There was no satisfaction in being awake.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8939">Once, he tried to arouse himself from his lethargy, and went forward into the forecastle with the sailors. </span>
      <span id="f8940"> But the breed of sailors seemed to have changed since the days he had lived in the forecastle. </span>
      <span id="f8941"> He could find no kinship with these stolid-faced, ox-minded bestial creatures. </span>
      <span id="f8942"> He was in despair. </span>
      <span id="f8943"> Up above nobody had wanted Martin Eden for his own sake, and he could not go back to those of his own class who had wanted him in the past. </span>
      <span id="f8944"> He did not want them. </span>
      <span id="f8945"> He could not stand them any more than he could stand the stupid first-cabin passengers and the riotous young people.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8946">Life was to him like strong, white light that hurts the tired eyes of a sick person. </span>
      <span id="f8947"> During every conscious moment life blazed in a raw glare around him and upon him. </span>
      <span id="f8948"> It hurt. </span>
      <span id="f8949"> It hurt intolerably. </span>
      <span id="f8950"> It was the first time in his life that Martin had travelled first class. </span>
      <span id="f8951"> On ships at sea he had always been in the forecastle, the steerage, or in the black depths of the coal-hold, passing coal. </span>
      <span id="f8952"> In those days, climbing up the iron ladders out the pit of stifling heat, he had often caught glimpses of the passengers, in cool white, doing nothing but enjoy themselves, under awnings spread to keep the sun and wind away from them, with subservient stewards taking care of their every want and whim, and it had seemed to him that the realm in which they moved and had their being was nothing else than paradise. </span>
      <span id="f8953"> Well, here he was, the great man on board, in the midmost centre of it, sitting at the captain&#39;s right hand, and yet vainly harking back to forecastle and stoke-hole in quest of the Paradise he had lost. </span>
      <span id="f8954"> He had found no new one, and now he could not find the old one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8955">He strove to stir himself and find something to interest him. </span>
      <span id="f8956"> He ventured the petty officers&#39; mess, and was glad to get away. </span>
      <span id="f8957"> He talked with a quartermaster off duty, an intelligent man who promptly prodded him with the socialist propaganda and forced into his hands a bunch of leaflets and pamphlets. </span>
      <span id="f8958"> He listened to the man expounding the slave-morality, and as he listened, he thought languidly of his own Nietzsche philosophy. </span>
      <span id="f8959"> But what was it worth, after all? </span>
      <span id="f8960"> He remembered one of Nietzsche&#39;s mad utterances wherein that madman had doubted truth. </span>
      <span id="f8961">And who was to say? </span>
      <span id="f8962"> Perhaps Nietzsche had been right. </span>
      <span id="f8963"> Perhaps there was no truth in anything, no truth in truth--no such thing as truth. </span>
      <span id="f8964"> But his mind wearied quickly, and he was content to go back to his chair and doze.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8965">Miserable as he was on the steamer, a new misery came upon him. </span>
      <span id="f8966"> What when the steamer reached Tahiti? </span>
      <span id="f8967"> He would have to go ashore. </span>
      <span id="f8968"> He would have to order his trade-goods, to find a passage on a schooner to the Marquesas, to do a thousand and one things that were awful to contemplate. </span>
      <span id="f8969"> Whenever he steeled himself deliberately to think, he could see the desperate peril in which he stood. </span>
      <span id="f8970"> In all truth, he was in the Valley of the Shadow, and his danger lay in that he was not afraid. </span>
      <span id="f8971"> If he were only afraid, he would make toward life. </span>
      <span id="f8972"> Being unafraid, he was drifting deeper into the shadow. </span>
      <span id="f8973"> He found no delight in the old familiar things of life. </span>
      <span id="f8974"> The Mariposa was now in the northeast trades, and this wine of wind, surging against him, irritated him. </span>
      <span id="f8975"> He had his chair moved to escape the embrace of this lusty comrade of old days and nights.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8976">The day the Mariposa entered the doldrums, Martin was more miserable than ever. </span>
      <span id="f8977"> He could no longer sleep. </span>
      <span id="f8978"> He was soaked with sleep, and perforce he must now stay awake and endure the white glare of life. </span>
      <span id="f8979"> He moved about restlessly. </span>
      <span id="f8980"> The air was sticky and humid, and the rain-squalls were unrefreshing. </span>
      <span id="f8981"> He ached with life. </span>
      <span id="f8982"> He walked around the deck until that hurt too much, then sat in his chair until he was compelled to walk again. </span>
      <span id="f8983"> He forced himself at last to finish the magazine, and from the steamer library he culled several volumes of poetry. </span>
      <span id="f8984"> But they could not hold him, and once more he took to walking.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f8985">He stayed late on deck, after dinner, but that did not help him, for when he went below, he could not sleep. </span>
      <span id="f8986"> This surcease from life had failed him. </span>
      <span id="f8987"> It was too much. </span>
      <span id="f8988"> He turned on the electric light and tried to read. </span>
      <span id="f8989"> One of the volumes was a Swinburne. </span>
      <span id="f8990"> He lay in bed, glancing through its pages, until suddenly he became aware that he was reading with interest. </span>
      <span id="f8991"> He finished the stanza, attempted to read on, then came back to it. </span>
      <span id="f8992"> He rested the book face downward on his breast and fell to thinking. </span>
      <span id="f8993"> That was it. </span>
      <span id="f8994"> The very thing. </span>
      <span id="f8995"> Strange that it had never come to him before. </span>
      <span id="f8996"> That was the meaning of it all; he had been drifting that way all the time, and now Swinburne showed him that it was the happy way out. </span>
      <span id="f8997"> He wanted rest, and here was rest awaiting him. </span>
      <span id="f8998"> He glanced at the open port-hole. </span>
      <span id="f8999"> Yes, it was large enough. </span>
      <span id="f9000"> For the first time in weeks he felt happy. </span>
      <span id="f9001"> At last he had discovered the cure of his ill. </span>
      <span id="f9002"> He picked up the book and read the stanza slowly aloud:-</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f9003">&#34;&#39;From too much love of living,    From hope and fear set free,    We thank with brief thanksgiving    Whatever gods may be    That no life lives forever;    That dead men rise up never;    That even the weariest river    Winds somewhere safe to sea.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f9004">He looked again at the open port. </span>
      <span id="f9005"> Swinburne had furnished the key. </span>
      <span id="f9006"> Life was ill, or, rather, it had become ill--an unbearable thing. </span>
      <span id="f9007"> &#34;That dead men rise up never!&#34;  That line stirred him with a profound feeling of gratitude. </span>
      <span id="f9008"> It was the one beneficent thing in the universe. </span>
      <span id="f9009"> When life became an aching weariness, death was ready to soothe away to everlasting sleep. </span>
      <span id="f9010"> But what was he waiting for? </span>
      <span id="f9011"> It was time to go.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f9012">He arose and thrust his head out the port-hole, looking down into the milky wash. </span>
      <span id="f9013"> The Mariposa was deeply loaded, and, hanging by his hands, his feet would be in the water. </span>
      <span id="f9014"> He could slip in noiselessly. </span>
      <span id="f9015"> No one would hear. </span>
      <span id="f9016"> A smother of spray dashed up, wetting his face. </span>
      <span id="f9017"> It tasted salt on his lips, and the taste was good. </span>
      <span id="f9018"> He wondered if he ought to write a swan-song, but laughed the thought away. </span>
      <span id="f9019"> There was no time. </span>
      <span id="f9020"> He was too impatient to be gone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f9021">Turning off the light in his room so that it might not betray him, he went out the port-hole feet first. </span>
      <span id="f9022"> His shoulders stuck, and he forced himself back so as to try it with one arm down by his side. </span>
      <span id="f9023"> A roll of the steamer aided him, and he was through, hanging by his hands. </span>
      <span id="f9024"> When his feet touched the sea, he let go. </span>
      <span id="f9025"> He was in a milky froth of water. </span>
      <span id="f9026">The side of the Mariposa rushed past him like a dark wall, broken here and there by lighted ports. </span>
      <span id="f9027"> She was certainly making time. </span>
      <span id="f9028"> Almost before he knew it, he was astern, swimming gently on the foam-crackling surface.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f9029">A bonita struck at his white body, and he laughed aloud. </span>
      <span id="f9030"> It had taken a piece out, and the sting of it reminded him of why he was there. </span>
      <span id="f9031"> In the work to do he had forgotten the purpose of it. </span>
      <span id="f9032"> The lights of the Mariposa were growing dim in the distance, and there he was, swimming confidently, as though it were his intention to make for the nearest land a thousand miles or so away.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f9033">It was the automatic instinct to live. </span>
      <span id="f9034"> He ceased swimming, but the moment he felt the water rising above his mouth the hands struck out sharply with a lifting movement. </span>
      <span id="f9035"> The will to live, was his thought, and the thought was accompanied by a sneer. </span>
      <span id="f9036"> Well, he had will,--ay, will strong enough that with one last exertion it could destroy itself and cease to be.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f9037">He changed his position to a vertical one. </span>
      <span id="f9038"> He glanced up at the quiet stars, at the same time emptying his lungs of air. </span>
      <span id="f9039"> With swift, vigorous propulsion of hands and feet, he lifted his shoulders and half his chest out of water. </span>
      <span id="f9040"> This was to gain impetus for the descent. </span>
      <span id="f9041"> Then he let himself go and sank without movement, a white statue, into the sea. </span>
      <span id="f9042"> He breathed in the water deeply, deliberately, after the manner of a man taking an anaesthetic. </span>
      <span id="f9043"> When he strangled, quite involuntarily his arms and legs clawed the water and drove him up to the surface and into the clear sight of the stars.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f9044">The will to live, he thought disdainfully, vainly endeavoring not to breathe the air into his bursting lungs. </span>
      <span id="f9045"> Well, he would have to try a new way. </span>
      <span id="f9046"> He filled his lungs with air, filled them full. </span>
      <span id="f9047"> This supply would take him far down. </span>
      <span id="f9048"> He turned over and went down head first, swimming with all his strength and all his will. </span>
      <span id="f9049"> Deeper and deeper he went. </span>
      <span id="f9050"> His eyes were open, and he watched the ghostly, phosphorescent trails of the darting bonita. </span>
      <span id="f9051"> As he swam, he hoped that they would not strike at him, for it might snap the tension of his will. </span>
      <span id="f9052"> But they did not strike, and he found time to be grateful for this last kindness of life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f9053">Down, down, he swam till his arms and leg grew tired and hardly moved. </span>
      <span id="f9054"> He knew that he was deep. </span>
      <span id="f9055"> The pressure on his ear-drums was a pain, and there was a buzzing in his head. </span>
      <span id="f9056"> His endurance was faltering, but he compelled his arms and legs to drive him deeper until his will snapped and the air drove from his lungs in a great explosive rush. </span>
      <span id="f9057"> The bubbles rubbed and bounded like tiny balloons against his cheeks and eyes as they took their upward flight. </span>
      <span id="f9058"> Then came pain and strangulation. </span>
      <span id="f9059"> This hurt was not death, was the thought that oscillated through his reeling consciousness. </span>
      <span id="f9060"> Death did not hurt. </span>
      <span id="f9061"> It was life, the pangs of life, this awful, suffocating feeling; it was the last blow life could deal him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f9062">His wilful hands and feet began to beat and churn about, spasmodically and feebly. </span>
      <span id="f9063"> But he had fooled them and the will to live that made them beat and churn. </span>
      <span id="f9064"> He was too deep down. </span>
      <span id="f9065"> They could never bring him to the surface. </span>
      <span id="f9066"> He seemed floating languidly in a sea of dreamy vision. </span>
      <span id="f9067"> Colors and radiances surrounded him and bathed him and pervaded him. </span>
      <span id="f9068"> What was that? </span>
      <span id="f9069"> It seemed a lighthouse; but it was inside his brain--a flashing, bright white light. </span>
      <span id="f9070"> It flashed swifter and swifter. </span>
      <span id="f9071"> There was a long rumble of sound, and it seemed to him that he was falling down a vast and interminable stairway. </span>
      <span id="f9072"> And somewhere at the bottom he fell into darkness. </span>
      <span id="f9073"> That much he knew. </span>
      <span id="f9074"> He had fallen into darkness. </span>
      <span id="f9075"> And at the instant he knew, he ceased to know.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>