<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>PREFACE</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0004">PREFACE</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0005">I HAVE endeavoured in this Ghostly little book, to raise the Ghost of an Idea, which shall not put my readers out of humour with themselves, with each other, with the season, or with me. </span>
      <span id="f0006"> May it haunt their houses pleasantly, and no one wish to lay it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0007">Their faithful Friend and Servant, C. </span>
      <span id="f0008">D. </span>
      <span id="f0009">December, 1843.</span>
      </p>
      <h2 id="f0010">STAVE I:  MARLEY&#39;S GHOST</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0011">MARLEY was dead: to begin with. </span>
      <span id="f0012">There is no doubt whatever about that. </span>
      <span id="f0013">The register of his burial was signed by the clergyman, the clerk, the undertaker, and the chief mourner. </span>
      <span id="f0014">Scrooge signed it: and Scrooge&#39;s name was good upon &#39;Change, for anything he chose to put his hand to. </span>
      <span id="f0015">Old Marley was as dead as a door-nail.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0016">Mind! </span>
      <span id="f0017">I don&#39;t mean to say that I know, of my own knowledge, what there is particularly dead about a door-nail. </span>
      <span id="f0018">I might have been inclined, myself, to regard a coffin-nail as the deadest piece of ironmongery in the trade. </span>
      <span id="f0019">But the wisdom of our ancestors is in the simile; and my unhallowed hands shall not disturb it, or the Country&#39;s done for. </span>
      <span id="f0020">You will therefore permit me to repeat, emphatically, that Marley was as dead as a door-nail.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0021">Scrooge knew he was dead? </span>
      <span id="f0022">Of course he did. </span>
      <span id="f0023">How could it be otherwise? </span>
      <span id="f0024">Scrooge and he were partners for I don&#39;t know how many years. </span>
      <span id="f0025">Scrooge was his sole executor, his sole administrator, his sole assign, his sole residuary legatee, his sole friend, and sole mourner. </span>
      <span id="f0026">And even Scrooge was not so dreadfully cut up by the sad event, but that he was an excellent man of business on the very day of the funeral, and solemnised it with an undoubted bargain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0027">The mention of Marley&#39;s funeral brings me back to the point I started from. </span>
      <span id="f0028">There is no doubt that Marley was dead. </span>
      <span id="f0029">This must be distinctly understood, or nothing wonderful can come of the story I am going to relate. </span>
      <span id="f0030">If we were not perfectly convinced that Hamlet&#39;s Father died before the play began, there would be nothing more remarkable in his taking a stroll at night, in an easterly wind, upon his own ramparts, than there would be in any other middle-aged gentleman rashly turning out after dark in a breezy spot--say Saint Paul&#39;s Churchyard for instance-- literally to astonish his son&#39;s weak mind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0031">Scrooge never painted out Old Marley&#39;s name. </span>
      <span id="f0032">There it stood, years afterwards, above the warehouse door: Scrooge and Marley. </span>
      <span id="f0033">The firm was known as Scrooge and Marley. </span>
      <span id="f0034">Sometimes people new to the business called Scrooge Scrooge, and sometimes Marley, but he answered to both names. </span>
      <span id="f0035">It was all the same to him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0036">Oh! </span>
      <span id="f0037">But he was a tight-fisted hand at the grind-stone, Scrooge! </span>
      <span id="f0038">a squeezing, wrenching, grasping, scraping, clutching, covetous, old sinner! </span>
      <span id="f0039">Hard and sharp as flint, from which no steel had ever struck out generous fire; secret, and self-contained, and solitary as an oyster. </span>
      <span id="f0040">The cold within him froze his old features, nipped his pointed nose, shrivelled his cheek, stiffened his gait; made his eyes red, his thin lips blue; and spoke out shrewdly in his grating voice. </span>
      <span id="f0041">A frosty rime was on his head, and on his eyebrows, and his wiry chin. </span>
      <span id="f0042">He carried his own low temperature always about with him; he iced his office in the dog-days; and didn&#39;t thaw it one degree at Christmas.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0043">External heat and cold had little influence on Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0044">No warmth could warm, no wintry weather chill him. </span>
      <span id="f0045">No wind that blew was bitterer than he, no falling snow was more intent upon its purpose, no pelting rain less open to entreaty. </span>
      <span id="f0046">Foul weather didn&#39;t know where to have him. </span>
      <span id="f0047">The heaviest rain, and snow, and hail, and sleet, could boast of the advantage over him in only one respect. </span>
      <span id="f0048">They often &#34;came down&#34; handsomely, and Scrooge never did.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0049">Nobody ever stopped him in the street to say, with gladsome looks, &#34;My dear Scrooge, how are you? </span>
      <span id="f0050">When will you come to see me?&#34; No beggars implored him to bestow a trifle, no children asked him what it was o&#39;clock, no man or woman ever once in all his life inquired the way to such and such a place, of Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0051">Even the blind men&#39;s dogs appeared to know him; and when they saw him coming on, would tug their owners into doorways and up courts; and then would wag their tails as though they said, &#34;No eye at all is better than an evil eye, dark master!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0052">But what did Scrooge care! </span>
      <span id="f0053">It was the very thing he liked. </span>
      <span id="f0054">To edge his way along the crowded paths of life, warning all human sympathy to keep its distance, was what the knowing ones call &#34;nuts&#34; to Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0055">Once upon a time--of all the good days in the year, on Christmas Eve--old Scrooge sat busy in his counting-house. </span>
      <span id="f0056">It was cold, bleak, biting weather: foggy withal: and he could hear the people in the court outside, go wheezing up and down, beating their hands upon their breasts, and stamping their feet upon the pavement stones to warm them. </span>
      <span id="f0057">The city clocks had only just gone three, but it was quite dark already-- it had not been light all day--and candles were flaring in the windows of the neighbouring offices, like ruddy smears upon the palpable brown air. </span>
      <span id="f0058">The fog came pouring in at every chink and keyhole, and was so dense without, that although the court was of the narrowest, the houses opposite were mere phantoms. </span>
      <span id="f0059">To see the dingy cloud come drooping down, obscuring everything, one might have thought that Nature lived hard by, and was brewing on a large scale.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0060">The door of Scrooge&#39;s counting-house was open that he might keep his eye upon his clerk, who in a dismal little cell beyond, a sort of tank, was copying letters. </span>
      <span id="f0061">Scrooge had a very small fire, but the clerk&#39;s fire was so very much smaller that it looked like one coal. </span>
      <span id="f0062">But he couldn&#39;t replenish it, for Scrooge kept the coal-box in his own room; and so surely as the clerk came in with the shovel, the master predicted that it would be necessary for them to part. </span>
      <span id="f0063">Wherefore the clerk put on his white comforter, and tried to warm himself at the candle; in which effort, not being a man of a strong imagination, he failed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0064">&#34;A merry Christmas, uncle! </span>
      <span id="f0065">God save you!&#34; cried a cheerful voice. </span>
      <span id="f0066">It was the voice of Scrooge&#39;s nephew, who came upon him so quickly that this was the first intimation he had of his approach.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0067">&#34;Bah!&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;Humbug!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0068">He had so heated himself with rapid walking in the fog and frost, this nephew of Scrooge&#39;s, that he was all in a glow; his face was ruddy and handsome; his eyes sparkled, and his breath smoked again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0069">&#34;Christmas a humbug, uncle!&#34; said Scrooge&#39;s nephew. </span>
      <span id="f0070">&#34;You don&#39;t mean that, I am sure?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0071">&#34;I do,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0072">&#34;Merry Christmas! </span>
      <span id="f0073">What right have you to be merry? </span>
      <span id="f0074">What reason have you to be merry? </span>
      <span id="f0075">You&#39;re poor enough.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0076">&#34;Come, then,&#34; returned the nephew gaily. </span>
      <span id="f0077">&#34;What right have you to be dismal? </span>
      <span id="f0078">What reason have you to be morose? </span>
      <span id="f0079">You&#39;re rich enough.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0080">Scrooge having no better answer ready on the spur of the moment, said, &#34;Bah!&#34; again; and followed it up with &#34;Humbug.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0081">&#34;Don&#39;t be cross, uncle!&#34; said the nephew.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0082">&#34;What else can I be,&#34; returned the uncle, &#34;when I live in such a world of fools as this? </span>
      <span id="f0083">Merry Christmas! </span>
      <span id="f0084">Out upon merry Christmas! </span>
      <span id="f0085">What&#39;s Christmas time to you but a time for paying bills without money; a time for finding yourself a year older, but not an hour richer; a time for balancing your books and having every item in &#39;em through a round dozen of months presented dead against you? </span>
      <span id="f0086">If I could work my will,&#34; said Scrooge indignantly, &#34;every idiot who goes about with &#39;Merry Christmas&#39; on his lips, should be boiled with his own pudding, and buried with a stake of holly through his heart. </span>
      <span id="f0087">He should!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0088">&#34;Uncle!&#34; pleaded the nephew.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0089">&#34;Nephew!&#34; returned the uncle sternly, &#34;keep Christmas in your own way, and let me keep it in mine.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0090">&#34;Keep it!&#34; repeated Scrooge&#39;s nephew. </span>
      <span id="f0091">&#34;But you don&#39;t keep it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0092">&#34;Let me leave it alone, then,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0093">&#34;Much good may it do you! </span>
      <span id="f0094">Much good it has ever done you!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0095">&#34;There are many things from which I might have derived good, by which I have not profited, I dare say,&#34; returned the nephew. </span>
      <span id="f0096">&#34;Christmas among the rest. </span>
      <span id="f0097">But I am sure I have always thought of Christmas time, when it has come round--apart from the veneration due to its sacred name and origin, if anything belonging to it can be apart from that--as a good time; a kind, forgiving, charitable, pleasant time; the only time I know of, in the long calendar of the year, when men and women seem by one consent to open their shut-up hearts freely, and to think of people below them as if they really were fellow-passengers to the grave, and not another race of creatures bound on other journeys. </span>
      <span id="f0098">And therefore, uncle, though it has never put a scrap of gold or silver in my pocket, I believe that it has done me good, and will do me good; and I say, God bless it!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0099">The clerk in the Tank involuntarily applauded. </span>
      <span id="f0100">Becoming immediately sensible of the impropriety, he poked the fire, and extinguished the last frail spark for ever.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0101">&#34;Let me hear another sound from you,&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;and you&#39;ll keep your Christmas by losing your situation! </span>
      <span id="f0102">You&#39;re quite a powerful speaker, sir,&#34; he added, turning to his nephew. </span>
      <span id="f0103">&#34;I wonder you don&#39;t go into Parliament.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0104">&#34;Don&#39;t be angry, uncle. </span>
      <span id="f0105">Come! </span>
      <span id="f0106">Dine with us to-morrow.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0107">Scrooge said that he would see him--yes, indeed he did. </span>
      <span id="f0108">He went the whole length of the expression, and said that he would see him in that extremity first.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0109">&#34;But why?&#34; cried Scrooge&#39;s nephew. </span>
      <span id="f0110">&#34;Why?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0111">&#34;Why did you get married?&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0112">&#34;Because I fell in love.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0113">&#34;Because you fell in love!&#34; growled Scrooge, as if that were the only one thing in the world more ridiculous than a merry Christmas. </span>
      <span id="f0114">&#34;Good afternoon!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0115">&#34;Nay, uncle, but you never came to see me before that happened. </span>
      <span id="f0116">Why give it as a reason for not coming now?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0117">&#34;Good afternoon,&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0118">&#34;I want nothing from you; I ask nothing of you; why cannot we be friends?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0119">&#34;Good afternoon,&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0120">&#34;I am sorry, with all my heart, to find you so resolute. </span>
      <span id="f0121">We have never had any quarrel, to which I have been a party. </span>
      <span id="f0122">But I have made the trial in homage to Christmas, and I&#39;ll keep my Christmas humour to the last. </span>
      <span id="f0123">So A Merry Christmas, uncle!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0124">&#34;Good afternoon!&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0125">&#34;And A Happy New Year!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0126">&#34;Good afternoon!&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0127">His nephew left the room without an angry word, notwithstanding. </span>
      <span id="f0128">He stopped at the outer door to bestow the greetings of the season on the clerk, who, cold as he was, was warmer than Scrooge; for he returned them cordially.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0129">&#34;There&#39;s another fellow,&#34; muttered Scrooge; who overheard him: &#34;my clerk, with fifteen shillings a week, and a wife and family, talking about a merry Christmas. </span>
      <span id="f0130">I&#39;ll retire to Bedlam.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0131">This lunatic, in letting Scrooge&#39;s nephew out, had let two other people in. </span>
      <span id="f0132">They were portly gentlemen, pleasant to behold, and now stood, with their hats off, in Scrooge&#39;s office. </span>
      <span id="f0133">They had books and papers in their hands, and bowed to him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0134">&#34;Scrooge and Marley&#39;s, I believe,&#34; said one of the gentlemen, referring to his list. </span>
      <span id="f0135">&#34;Have I the pleasure of addressing Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0136">Scrooge, or Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0137">Marley?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0138">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0139">Marley has been dead these seven years,&#34; Scrooge replied. </span>
      <span id="f0140">&#34;He died seven years ago, this very night.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0141">&#34;We have no doubt his liberality is well represented by his surviving partner,&#34; said the gentleman, presenting his credentials.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0142">It certainly was; for they had been two kindred spirits. </span>
      <span id="f0143">At the ominous word &#34;liberality,&#34; Scrooge frowned, and shook his head, and handed the credentials back.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0144">&#34;At this festive season of the year, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0145">Scrooge,&#34; said the gentleman, taking up a pen, &#34;it is more than usually desirable that we should make some slight provision for the Poor and destitute, who suffer greatly at the present time. </span>
      <span id="f0146">Many thousands are in want of common necessaries; hundreds of thousands are in want of common comforts, sir.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0147">&#34;Are there no prisons?&#34; asked Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0148">&#34;Plenty of prisons,&#34; said the gentleman, laying down the pen again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0149">&#34;And the Union workhouses?&#34; demanded Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0150">&#34;Are they still in operation?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0151">&#34;They are. </span>
      <span id="f0152">Still,&#34; returned the gentleman, &#34;I wish I could say they were not.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0153">&#34;The Treadmill and the Poor Law are in full vigour, then?&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0154">&#34;Both very busy, sir.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0155">&#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f0156">I was afraid, from what you said at first, that something had occurred to stop them in their useful course,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0157">&#34;I&#39;m very glad to hear it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0158">&#34;Under the impression that they scarcely furnish Christian cheer of mind or body to the multitude,&#34; returned the gentleman, &#34;a few of us are endeavouring to raise a fund to buy the Poor some meat and drink, and means of warmth. </span>
      <span id="f0159">We choose this time, because it is a time, of all others, when Want is keenly felt, and Abundance rejoices. </span>
      <span id="f0160">What shall I put you down for?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0161">&#34;Nothing!&#34; Scrooge replied.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0162">&#34;You wish to be anonymous?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0163">&#34;I wish to be left alone,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0164">&#34;Since you ask me what I wish, gentlemen, that is my answer. </span>
      <span id="f0165">I don&#39;t make merry myself at Christmas and I can&#39;t afford to make idle people merry. </span>
      <span id="f0166">I help to support the establishments I have mentioned--they cost enough; and those who are badly off must go there.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0167">&#34;Many can&#39;t go there; and many would rather die.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0168">&#34;If they would rather die,&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;they had better do it, and decrease the surplus population. </span>
      <span id="f0169">Besides--excuse me--I don&#39;t know that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0170">&#34;But you might know it,&#34; observed the gentleman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0171">&#34;It&#39;s not my business,&#34; Scrooge returned. </span>
      <span id="f0172">&#34;It&#39;s enough for a man to understand his own business, and not to interfere with other people&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f0173">Mine occupies me constantly. </span>
      <span id="f0174">Good afternoon, gentlemen!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0175">Seeing clearly that it would be useless to pursue their point, the gentlemen withdrew. </span>
      <span id="f0176">Scrooge resumed his labours with an improved opinion of himself, and in a more facetious temper than was usual with him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0177">Meanwhile the fog and darkness thickened so, that people ran about with flaring links, proffering their services to go before horses in carriages, and conduct them on their way. </span>
      <span id="f0178">The ancient tower of a church, whose gruff old bell was always peeping slily down at Scrooge out of a Gothic window in the wall, became invisible, and struck the hours and quarters in the clouds, with tremulous vibrations afterwards as if its teeth were chattering in its frozen head up there. </span>
      <span id="f0179">The cold became intense. </span>
      <span id="f0180">In the main street, at the corner of the court, some labourers were repairing the gas-pipes, and had lighted a great fire in a brazier, round which a party of ragged men and boys were gathered: warming their hands and winking their eyes before the blaze in rapture. </span>
      <span id="f0181">The water-plug being left in solitude, its overflowings sullenly congealed, and turned to misanthropic ice. </span>
      <span id="f0182">The brightness of the shops where holly sprigs and berries crackled in the lamp heat of the windows, made pale faces ruddy as they passed. </span>
      <span id="f0183">Poulterers&#39; and grocers&#39; trades became a splendid joke: a glorious pageant, with which it was next to impossible to believe that such dull principles as bargain and sale had anything to do. </span>
      <span id="f0184">The Lord Mayor, in the stronghold of the mighty Mansion House, gave orders to his fifty cooks and butlers to keep Christmas as a Lord Mayor&#39;s household should; and even the little tailor, whom he had fined five shillings on the previous Monday for being drunk and bloodthirsty in the streets, stirred up to-morrow&#39;s pudding in his garret, while his lean wife and the baby sallied out to buy the beef.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0185">Foggier yet, and colder. </span>
      <span id="f0186">Piercing, searching, biting cold. </span>
      <span id="f0187">If the good Saint Dunstan had but nipped the Evil Spirit&#39;s nose with a touch of such weather as that, instead of using his familiar weapons, then indeed he would have roared to lusty purpose. </span>
      <span id="f0188">The owner of one scant young nose, gnawed and mumbled by the hungry cold as bones are gnawed by dogs, stooped down at Scrooge&#39;s keyhole to regale him with a Christmas carol: but at the first sound of</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0189">&#34;God bless you, merry gentleman! </span>
      <span id="f0190">         May nothing you dismay!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0191">Scrooge seized the ruler with such energy of action, that the singer fled in terror, leaving the keyhole to the fog and even more congenial frost.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0192">At length the hour of shutting up the counting-house arrived. </span>
      <span id="f0193">With an ill-will Scrooge dismounted from his stool, and tacitly admitted the fact to the expectant clerk in the Tank, who instantly snuffed his candle out, and put on his hat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0194">&#34;You&#39;ll want all day to-morrow, I suppose?&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0195">&#34;If quite convenient, sir.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0196">&#34;It&#39;s not convenient,&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;and it&#39;s not fair. </span>
      <span id="f0197">If I was to stop half-a-crown for it, you&#39;d think yourself ill-used, I&#39;ll be bound?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0198">The clerk smiled faintly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0199">&#34;And yet,&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;you don&#39;t think me ill-used, when I pay a day&#39;s wages for no work.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0200">The clerk observed that it was only once a year.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0201">&#34;A poor excuse for picking a man&#39;s pocket every twenty-fifth of December!&#34; said Scrooge, buttoning his great-coat to the chin. </span>
      <span id="f0202">&#34;But I suppose you must have the whole day. </span>
      <span id="f0203">Be here all the earlier next morning.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0204">The clerk promised that he would; and Scrooge walked out with a growl. </span>
      <span id="f0205">The office was closed in a twinkling, and the clerk, with the long ends of his white comforter dangling below his waist (for he boasted no great-coat), went down a slide on Cornhill, at the end of a lane of boys, twenty times, in honour of its being Christmas Eve, and then ran home to Camden Town as hard as he could pelt, to play at blindman&#39;s-buff.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0206">Scrooge took his melancholy dinner in his usual melancholy tavern; and having read all the newspapers, and beguiled the rest of the evening with his banker&#39;s-book, went home to bed. </span>
      <span id="f0207">He lived in chambers which had once belonged to his deceased partner. </span>
      <span id="f0208">They were a gloomy suite of rooms, in a lowering pile of building up a yard, where it had so little business to be, that one could scarcely help fancying it must have run there when it was a young house, playing at hide-and-seek with other houses, and forgotten the way out again. </span>
      <span id="f0209">It was old enough now, and dreary enough, for nobody lived in it but Scrooge, the other rooms being all let out as offices. </span>
      <span id="f0210">The yard was so dark that even Scrooge, who knew its every stone, was fain to grope with his hands. </span>
      <span id="f0211">The fog and frost so hung about the black old gateway of the house, that it seemed as if the Genius of the Weather sat in mournful meditation on the threshold.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0212">Now, it is a fact, that there was nothing at all particular about the knocker on the door, except that it was very large. </span>
      <span id="f0213">It is also a fact, that Scrooge had seen it, night and morning, during his whole residence in that place; also that Scrooge had as little of what is called fancy about him as any man in the city of London, even including--which is a bold word--the corporation, aldermen, and livery. </span>
      <span id="f0214">Let it also be borne in mind that Scrooge had not bestowed one thought on Marley, since his last mention of his seven years&#39; dead partner that afternoon. </span>
      <span id="f0215">And then let any man explain to me, if he can, how it happened that Scrooge, having his key in the lock of the door, saw in the knocker, without its undergoing any intermediate process of change--not a knocker, but Marley&#39;s face.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0216">Marley&#39;s face. </span>
      <span id="f0217">It was not in impenetrable shadow as the other objects in the yard were, but had a dismal light about it, like a bad lobster in a dark cellar. </span>
      <span id="f0218">It was not angry or ferocious, but looked at Scrooge as Marley used to look: with ghostly spectacles turned up on its ghostly forehead. </span>
      <span id="f0219">The hair was curiously stirred, as if by breath or hot air; and, though the eyes were wide open, they were perfectly motionless. </span>
      <span id="f0220">That, and its livid colour, made it horrible; but its horror seemed to be in spite of the face and beyond its control, rather than a part of its own expression.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0221">As Scrooge looked fixedly at this phenomenon, it was a knocker again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0222">To say that he was not startled, or that his blood was not conscious of a terrible sensation to which it had been a stranger from infancy, would be untrue. </span>
      <span id="f0223">But he put his hand upon the key he had relinquished, turned it sturdily, walked in, and lighted his candle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0224">He did pause, with a moment&#39;s irresolution, before he shut the door; and he did look cautiously behind it first, as if he half expected to be terrified with the sight of Marley&#39;s pigtail sticking out into the hall. </span>
      <span id="f0225">But there was nothing on the back of the door, except the screws and nuts that held the knocker on, so he said &#34;Pooh, pooh!&#34; and closed it with a bang.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0226">The sound resounded through the house like thunder. </span>
      <span id="f0227">Every room above, and every cask in the wine-merchant&#39;s cellars below, appeared to have a separate peal of echoes of its own. </span>
      <span id="f0228">Scrooge was not a man to be frightened by echoes. </span>
      <span id="f0229">He fastened the door, and walked across the hall, and up the stairs; slowly too: trimming his candle as he went.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0230">You may talk vaguely about driving a coach-and-six up a good old flight of stairs, or through a bad young Act of Parliament; but I mean to say you might have got a hearse up that staircase, and taken it broadwise, with the splinter-bar towards the wall and the door towards the balustrades: and done it easy. </span>
      <span id="f0231">There was plenty of width for that, and room to spare; which is perhaps the reason why Scrooge thought he saw a locomotive hearse going on before him in the gloom. </span>
      <span id="f0232">Half-a-dozen gas-lamps out of the street wouldn&#39;t have lighted the entry too well, so you may suppose that it was pretty dark with Scrooge&#39;s dip.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0233">Up Scrooge went, not caring a button for that. </span>
      <span id="f0234">Darkness is cheap, and Scrooge liked it. </span>
      <span id="f0235">But before he shut his heavy door, he walked through his rooms to see that all was right. </span>
      <span id="f0236">He had just enough recollection of the face to desire to do that.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0237">Sitting-room, bedroom, lumber-room. </span>
      <span id="f0238">All as they should be. </span>
      <span id="f0239">Nobody under the table, nobody under the sofa; a small fire in the grate; spoon and basin ready; and the little saucepan of gruel (Scrooge had a cold in his head) upon the hob. </span>
      <span id="f0240">Nobody under the bed; nobody in the closet; nobody in his dressing-gown, which was hanging up in a suspicious attitude against the wall. </span>
      <span id="f0241">Lumber-room as usual. </span>
      <span id="f0242">Old fire-guard, old shoes, two fish-baskets, washing-stand on three legs, and a poker.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0243">Quite satisfied, he closed his door, and locked himself in; double-locked himself in, which was not his custom. </span>
      <span id="f0244">Thus secured against surprise, he took off his cravat; put on his dressing-gown and slippers, and his nightcap; and sat down before the fire to take his gruel.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0245">It was a very low fire indeed; nothing on such a bitter night. </span>
      <span id="f0246">He was obliged to sit close to it, and brood over it, before he could extract the least sensation of warmth from such a handful of fuel. </span>
      <span id="f0247">The fireplace was an old one, built by some Dutch merchant long ago, and paved all round with quaint Dutch tiles, designed to illustrate the Scriptures. </span>
      <span id="f0248">There were Cains and Abels, Pharaoh&#39;s daughters; Queens of Sheba, Angelic messengers descending through the air on clouds like feather-beds, Abrahams, Belshazzars, Apostles putting off to sea in butter-boats, hundreds of figures to attract his thoughts; and yet that face of Marley, seven years dead, came like the ancient Prophet&#39;s rod, and swallowed up the whole. </span>
      <span id="f0249">If each smooth tile had been a blank at first, with power to shape some picture on its surface from the disjointed fragments of his thoughts, there would have been a copy of old Marley&#39;s head on every one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0250">&#34;Humbug!&#34; said Scrooge; and walked across the room.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0251">After several turns, he sat down again. </span>
      <span id="f0252">As he threw his head back in the chair, his glance happened to rest upon a bell, a disused bell, that hung in the room, and communicated for some purpose now forgotten with a chamber in the highest story of the building. </span>
      <span id="f0253">It was with great astonishment, and with a strange, inexplicable dread, that as he looked, he saw this bell begin to swing. </span>
      <span id="f0254">It swung so softly in the outset that it scarcely made a sound; but soon it rang out loudly, and so did every bell in the house.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0255">This might have lasted half a minute, or a minute, but it seemed an hour. </span>
      <span id="f0256">The bells ceased as they had begun, together. </span>
      <span id="f0257">They were succeeded by a clanking noise, deep down below; as if some person were dragging a heavy chain over the casks in the wine-merchant&#39;s cellar. </span>
      <span id="f0258">Scrooge then remembered to have heard that ghosts in haunted houses were described as dragging chains.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0259">The cellar-door flew open with a booming sound, and then he heard the noise much louder, on the floors below; then coming up the stairs; then coming straight towards his door.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0260">&#34;It&#39;s humbug still!&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0261">&#34;I won&#39;t believe it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0262">His colour changed though, when, without a pause, it came on through the heavy door, and passed into the room before his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0263">Upon its coming in, the dying flame leaped up, as though it cried, &#34;I know him; Marley&#39;s Ghost!&#34; and fell again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0264">The same face: the very same. </span>
      <span id="f0265">Marley in his pigtail, usual waistcoat, tights and boots; the tassels on the latter bristling, like his pigtail, and his coat-skirts, and the hair upon his head. </span>
      <span id="f0266">The chain he drew was clasped about his middle. </span>
      <span id="f0267">It was long, and wound about him like a tail; and it was made (for Scrooge observed it closely) of cash-boxes, keys, padlocks, ledgers, deeds, and heavy purses wrought in steel. </span>
      <span id="f0268">His body was transparent; so that Scrooge, observing him, and looking through his waistcoat, could see the two buttons on his coat behind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0269">Scrooge had often heard it said that Marley had no bowels, but he had never believed it until now.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0270">No, nor did he believe it even now. </span>
      <span id="f0271">Though he looked the phantom through and through, and saw it standing before him; though he felt the chilling influence of its death-cold eyes; and marked the very texture of the folded kerchief bound about its head and chin, which wrapper he had not observed before; he was still incredulous, and fought against his senses.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0272">&#34;How now!&#34; said Scrooge, caustic and cold as ever. </span>
      <span id="f0273">&#34;What do you want with me?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0274">&#34;Much!&#34;--Marley&#39;s voice, no doubt about it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0275">&#34;Who are you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0276">&#34;Ask me who I was.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0277">&#34;Who were you then?&#34; said Scrooge, raising his voice. </span>
      <span id="f0278">&#34;You&#39;re particular, for a shade.&#34; He was going to say &#34;to a shade,&#34; but substituted this, as more appropriate.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0279">&#34;In life I was your partner, Jacob Marley.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0280">&#34;Can you--can you sit down?&#34; asked Scrooge, looking doubtfully at him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0281">&#34;I can.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0282">&#34;Do it, then.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0283">Scrooge asked the question, because he didn&#39;t know whether a ghost so transparent might find himself in a condition to take a chair; and felt that in the event of its being impossible, it might involve the necessity of an embarrassing explanation. </span>
      <span id="f0284">But the ghost sat down on the opposite side of the fireplace, as if he were quite used to it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0285">&#34;You don&#39;t believe in me,&#34; observed the Ghost.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0286">&#34;I don&#39;t,&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0287">&#34;What evidence would you have of my reality beyond that of your senses?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0288">&#34;I don&#39;t know,&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0289">&#34;Why do you doubt your senses?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0290">&#34;Because,&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;a little thing affects them. </span>
      <span id="f0291">A slight disorder of the stomach makes them cheats. </span>
      <span id="f0292">You may be an undigested bit of beef, a blot of mustard, a crumb of cheese, a fragment of an underdone potato. </span>
      <span id="f0293">There&#39;s more of gravy than of grave about you, whatever you are!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0294">Scrooge was not much in the habit of cracking jokes, nor did he feel, in his heart, by any means waggish then. </span>
      <span id="f0295">The truth is, that he tried to be smart, as a means of distracting his own attention, and keeping down his terror; for the spectre&#39;s voice disturbed the very marrow in his bones.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0296">To sit, staring at those fixed glazed eyes, in silence for a moment, would play, Scrooge felt, the very deuce with him. </span>
      <span id="f0297">There was something very awful, too, in the spectre&#39;s being provided with an infernal atmosphere of its own. </span>
      <span id="f0298">Scrooge could not feel it himself, but this was clearly the case; for though the Ghost sat perfectly motionless, its hair, and skirts, and tassels, were still agitated as by the hot vapour from an oven.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0299">&#34;You see this toothpick?&#34; said Scrooge, returning quickly to the charge, for the reason just assigned; and wishing, though it were only for a second, to divert the vision&#39;s stony gaze from himself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0300">&#34;I do,&#34; replied the Ghost.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0301">&#34;You are not looking at it,&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0302">&#34;But I see it,&#34; said the Ghost, &#34;notwithstanding.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0303">&#34;Well!&#34; returned Scrooge, &#34;I have but to swallow this, and be for the rest of my days persecuted by a legion of goblins, all of my own creation. </span>
      <span id="f0304">Humbug, I tell you! </span>
      <span id="f0305">humbug!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0306">At this the spirit raised a frightful cry, and shook its chain with such a dismal and appalling noise, that Scrooge held on tight to his chair, to save himself from falling in a swoon. </span>
      <span id="f0307">But how much greater was his horror, when the phantom taking off the bandage round its head, as if it were too warm to wear indoors, its lower jaw dropped down upon its breast!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0308">Scrooge fell upon his knees, and clasped his hands before his face.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0309">&#34;Mercy!&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f0310">&#34;Dreadful apparition, why do you trouble me?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0311">&#34;Man of the worldly mind!&#34; replied the Ghost, &#34;do you believe in me or not?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0312">&#34;I do,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0313">&#34;I must. </span>
      <span id="f0314">But why do spirits walk the earth, and why do they come to me?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0315">&#34;It is required of every man,&#34; the Ghost returned, &#34;that the spirit within him should walk abroad among his fellowmen, and travel far and wide; and if that spirit goes not forth in life, it is condemned to do so after death. </span>
      <span id="f0316">It is doomed to wander through the world--oh, woe is me!--and witness what it cannot share, but might have shared on earth, and turned to happiness!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0317">Again the spectre raised a cry, and shook its chain and wrung its shadowy hands.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0318">&#34;You are fettered,&#34; said Scrooge, trembling. </span>
      <span id="f0319">&#34;Tell me why?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0320">&#34;I wear the chain I forged in life,&#34; replied the Ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0321">&#34;I made it link by link, and yard by yard; I girded it on of my own free will, and of my own free will I wore it. </span>
      <span id="f0322">Is its pattern strange to you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0323">Scrooge trembled more and more.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0324">&#34;Or would you know,&#34; pursued the Ghost, &#34;the weight and length of the strong coil you bear yourself? </span>
      <span id="f0325">It was full as heavy and as long as this, seven Christmas Eves ago. </span>
      <span id="f0326">You have laboured on it, since. </span>
      <span id="f0327">It is a ponderous chain!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0328">Scrooge glanced about him on the floor, in the expectation of finding himself surrounded by some fifty or sixty fathoms of iron cable: but he could see nothing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0329">&#34;Jacob,&#34; he said, imploringly. </span>
      <span id="f0330">&#34;Old Jacob Marley, tell me more. </span>
      <span id="f0331">Speak comfort to me, Jacob!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0332">&#34;I have none to give,&#34; the Ghost replied. </span>
      <span id="f0333">&#34;It comes from other regions, Ebenezer Scrooge, and is conveyed by other ministers, to other kinds of men. </span>
      <span id="f0334">Nor can I tell you what I would. </span>
      <span id="f0335">A very little more is all permitted to me. </span>
      <span id="f0336">I cannot rest, I cannot stay, I cannot linger anywhere. </span>
      <span id="f0337">My spirit never walked beyond our counting-house--mark me!--in life my spirit never roved beyond the narrow limits of our money-changing hole; and weary journeys lie before me!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0338">It was a habit with Scrooge, whenever he became thoughtful, to put his hands in his breeches pockets. </span>
      <span id="f0339">Pondering on what the Ghost had said, he did so now, but without lifting up his eyes, or getting off his knees.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0340">&#34;You must have been very slow about it, Jacob,&#34; Scrooge observed, in a business-like manner, though with humility and deference.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0341">&#34;Slow!&#34; the Ghost repeated.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0342">&#34;Seven years dead,&#34; mused Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0343">&#34;And travelling all the time!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0344">&#34;The whole time,&#34; said the Ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0345">&#34;No rest, no peace. </span>
      <span id="f0346">Incessant torture of remorse.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0347">&#34;You travel fast?&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0348">&#34;On the wings of the wind,&#34; replied the Ghost.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0349">&#34;You might have got over a great quantity of ground in seven years,&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0350">The Ghost, on hearing this, set up another cry, and clanked its chain so hideously in the dead silence of the night, that the Ward would have been justified in indicting it for a nuisance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0351">&#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f0352">captive, bound, and double-ironed,&#34; cried the phantom, &#34;not to know, that ages of incessant labour by immortal creatures, for this earth must pass into eternity before the good of which it is susceptible is all developed. </span>
      <span id="f0353">Not to know that any Christian spirit working kindly in its little sphere, whatever it may be, will find its mortal life too short for its vast means of usefulness. </span>
      <span id="f0354">Not to know that no space of regret can make amends for one life&#39;s opportunity misused! </span>
      <span id="f0355">Yet such was I! </span>
      <span id="f0356">Oh! </span>
      <span id="f0357">such was I!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0358">&#34;But you were always a good man of business, Jacob,&#34; faltered Scrooge, who now began to apply this to himself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0359">&#34;Business!&#34; cried the Ghost, wringing its hands again. </span>
      <span id="f0360">&#34;Mankind was my business. </span>
      <span id="f0361">The common welfare was my business; charity, mercy, forbearance, and benevolence, were, all, my business. </span>
      <span id="f0362">The dealings of my trade were but a drop of water in the comprehensive ocean of my business!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0363">It held up its chain at arm&#39;s length, as if that were the cause of all its unavailing grief, and flung it heavily upon the ground again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0364">&#34;At this time of the rolling year,&#34; the spectre said, &#34;I suffer most. </span>
      <span id="f0365">Why did I walk through crowds of fellow-beings with my eyes turned down, and never raise them to that blessed Star which led the Wise Men to a poor abode! </span>
      <span id="f0366">Were there no poor homes to which its light would have conducted me!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0367">Scrooge was very much dismayed to hear the spectre going on at this rate, and began to quake exceedingly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0368">&#34;Hear me!&#34; cried the Ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0369">&#34;My time is nearly gone.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0370">&#34;I will,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0371">&#34;But don&#39;t be hard upon me! </span>
      <span id="f0372">Don&#39;t be flowery, Jacob! </span>
      <span id="f0373">Pray!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0374">&#34;How it is that I appear before you in a shape that you can see, I may not tell. </span>
      <span id="f0375">I have sat invisible beside you many and many a day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0376">It was not an agreeable idea. </span>
      <span id="f0377">Scrooge shivered, and wiped the perspiration from his brow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0378">&#34;That is no light part of my penance,&#34; pursued the Ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0379">&#34;I am here to-night to warn you, that you have yet a chance and hope of escaping my fate. </span>
      <span id="f0380">A chance and hope of my procuring, Ebenezer.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0381">&#34;You were always a good friend to me,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0382">&#34;Thank&#39;ee!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0383">&#34;You will be haunted,&#34; resumed the Ghost, &#34;by Three Spirits.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0384">Scrooge&#39;s countenance fell almost as low as the Ghost&#39;s had done.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0385">&#34;Is that the chance and hope you mentioned, Jacob?&#34; he demanded, in a faltering voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0386">&#34;It is.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0387">&#34;I--I think I&#39;d rather not,&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0388">&#34;Without their visits,&#34; said the Ghost, &#34;you cannot hope to shun the path I tread. </span>
      <span id="f0389">Expect the first to-morrow, when the bell tolls One.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0390">&#34;Couldn&#39;t I take &#39;em all at once, and have it over, Jacob?&#34; hinted Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0391">&#34;Expect the second on the next night at the same hour. </span>
      <span id="f0392">The third upon the next night when the last stroke of Twelve has ceased to vibrate. </span>
      <span id="f0393">Look to see me no more; and look that, for your own sake, you remember what has passed between us!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0394">When it had said these words, the spectre took its wrapper from the table, and bound it round its head, as before. </span>
      <span id="f0395">Scrooge knew this, by the smart sound its teeth made, when the jaws were brought together by the bandage. </span>
      <span id="f0396">He ventured to raise his eyes again, and found his supernatural visitor confronting him in an erect attitude, with its chain wound over and about its arm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0397">The apparition walked backward from him; and at every step it took, the window raised itself a little, so that when the spectre reached it, it was wide open.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0398">It beckoned Scrooge to approach, which he did. </span>
      <span id="f0399">When they were within two paces of each other, Marley&#39;s Ghost held up its hand, warning him to come no nearer. </span>
      <span id="f0400">Scrooge stopped.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0401">Not so much in obedience, as in surprise and fear: for on the raising of the hand, he became sensible of confused noises in the air; incoherent sounds of lamentation and regret; wailings inexpressibly sorrowful and self-accusatory. </span>
      <span id="f0402">The spectre, after listening for a moment, joined in the mournful dirge; and floated out upon the bleak, dark night.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0403">Scrooge followed to the window: desperate in his curiosity. </span>
      <span id="f0404">He looked out.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0405">The air was filled with phantoms, wandering hither and thither in restless haste, and moaning as they went. </span>
      <span id="f0406">Every one of them wore chains like Marley&#39;s Ghost; some few (they might be guilty governments) were linked together; none were free. </span>
      <span id="f0407">Many had been personally known to Scrooge in their lives. </span>
      <span id="f0408">He had been quite familiar with one old ghost, in a white waistcoat, with a monstrous iron safe attached to its ankle, who cried piteously at being unable to assist a wretched woman with an infant, whom it saw below, upon a door-step. </span>
      <span id="f0409">The misery with them all was, clearly, that they sought to interfere, for good, in human matters, and had lost the power for ever.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0410">Whether these creatures faded into mist, or mist enshrouded them, he could not tell. </span>
      <span id="f0411">But they and their spirit voices faded together; and the night became as it had been when he walked home.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0412">Scrooge closed the window, and examined the door by which the Ghost had entered. </span>
      <span id="f0413">It was double-locked, as he had locked it with his own hands, and the bolts were undisturbed. </span>
      <span id="f0414">He tried to say &#34;Humbug!&#34; but stopped at the first syllable. </span>
      <span id="f0415">And being, from the emotion he had undergone, or the fatigues of the day, or his glimpse of the Invisible World, or the dull conversation of the Ghost, or the lateness of the hour, much in need of repose; went straight to bed, without undressing, and fell asleep upon the instant.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>