<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>STAVE II:  THE FIRST OF THE THREE SPIRITS</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0416">STAVE II:  THE FIRST OF THE THREE SPIRITS</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0417">WHEN Scrooge awoke, it was so dark, that looking out of bed, he could scarcely distinguish the transparent window from the opaque walls of his chamber. </span>
      <span id="f0418">He was endeavouring to pierce the darkness with his ferret eyes, when the chimes of a neighbouring church struck the four quarters. </span>
      <span id="f0419">So he listened for the hour.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0420">To his great astonishment the heavy bell went on from six to seven, and from seven to eight, and regularly up to twelve; then stopped. </span>
      <span id="f0421">Twelve! </span>
      <span id="f0422">It was past two when he went to bed. </span>
      <span id="f0423">The clock was wrong. </span>
      <span id="f0424">An icicle must have got into the works. </span>
      <span id="f0425">Twelve!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0426">He touched the spring of his repeater, to correct this most preposterous clock. </span>
      <span id="f0427">Its rapid little pulse beat twelve: and stopped.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0428">&#34;Why, it isn&#39;t possible,&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;that I can have slept through a whole day and far into another night. </span>
      <span id="f0429">It isn&#39;t possible that anything has happened to the sun, and this is twelve at noon!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0430">The idea being an alarming one, he scrambled out of bed, and groped his way to the window. </span>
      <span id="f0431">He was obliged to rub the frost off with the sleeve of his dressing-gown before he could see anything; and could see very little then. </span>
      <span id="f0432">All he could make out was, that it was still very foggy and extremely cold, and that there was no noise of people running to and fro, and making a great stir, as there unquestionably would have been if night had beaten off bright day, and taken possession of the world. </span>
      <span id="f0433"> This was a great relief, because &#34;three days after sight of this First of Exchange pay to Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0434">Ebenezer Scrooge or his order,&#34; and so forth, would have become a mere United States&#39; security if there were no days to count by.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0435">Scrooge went to bed again, and thought, and thought, and thought it over and over and over, and could make nothing of it. </span>
      <span id="f0436"> The more he thought, the more perplexed he was; and the more he endeavoured not to think, the more he thought.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0437">Marley&#39;s Ghost bothered him exceedingly. </span>
      <span id="f0438">Every time he resolved within himself, after mature inquiry, that it was all a dream, his mind flew back again, like a strong spring released, to its first position, and presented the same problem to be worked all through, &#34;Was it a dream or not?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0439">Scrooge lay in this state until the chime had gone three quarters more, when he remembered, on a sudden, that the Ghost had warned him of a visitation when the bell tolled one. </span>
      <span id="f0440"> He resolved to lie awake until the hour was passed; and, considering that he could no more go to sleep than go to Heaven, this was perhaps the wisest resolution in his power.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0441">The quarter was so long, that he was more than once convinced he must have sunk into a doze unconsciously, and missed the clock. </span>
      <span id="f0442">At length it broke upon his listening ear.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0443">&#34;Ding, dong!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0444">&#34;A quarter past,&#34; said Scrooge, counting.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0445">&#34;Ding, dong!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0446">&#34;Half-past!&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0447">&#34;Ding, dong!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0448">&#34;A quarter to it,&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0449">&#34;Ding, dong!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0450">&#34;The hour itself,&#34; said Scrooge, triumphantly, &#34;and nothing else!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0451">He spoke before the hour bell sounded, which it now did with a deep, dull, hollow, melancholy ONE. </span>
      <span id="f0452"> Light flashed up in the room upon the instant, and the curtains of his bed were drawn.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0453">The curtains of his bed were drawn aside, I tell you, by a hand. </span>
      <span id="f0454">Not the curtains at his feet, nor the curtains at his back, but those to which his face was addressed. </span>
      <span id="f0455">The curtains of his bed were drawn aside; and Scrooge, starting up into a half-recumbent attitude, found himself face to face with the unearthly visitor who drew them: as close to it as I am now to you, and I am standing in the spirit at your elbow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0456">It was a strange figure--like a child: yet not so like a child as like an old man, viewed through some supernatural medium, which gave him the appearance of having receded from the view, and being diminished to a child&#39;s proportions. </span>
      <span id="f0457">Its hair, which hung about its neck and down its back, was white as if with age; and yet the face had not a wrinkle in it, and the tenderest bloom was on the skin. </span>
      <span id="f0458">The arms were very long and muscular; the hands the same, as if its hold were of uncommon strength. </span>
      <span id="f0459">Its legs and feet, most delicately formed, were, like those upper members, bare. </span>
      <span id="f0460">It wore a tunic of the purest white; and round its waist was bound a lustrous belt, the sheen of which was beautiful. </span>
      <span id="f0461">It held a branch of fresh green holly in its hand; and, in singular contradiction of that wintry emblem, had its dress trimmed with summer flowers. </span>
      <span id="f0462">But the strangest thing about it was, that from the crown of its head there sprung a bright clear jet of light, by which all this was visible; and which was doubtless the occasion of its using, in its duller moments, a great extinguisher for a cap, which it now held under its arm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0463">Even this, though, when Scrooge looked at it with increasing steadiness, was not its strangest quality. </span>
      <span id="f0464">For as its belt sparkled and glittered now in one part and now in another, and what was light one instant, at another time was dark, so the figure itself fluctuated in its distinctness: being now a thing with one arm, now with one leg, now with twenty legs, now a pair of legs without a head, now a head without a body: of which dissolving parts, no outline would be visible in the dense gloom wherein they melted away. </span>
      <span id="f0465">And in the very wonder of this, it would be itself again; distinct and clear as ever.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0466">&#34;Are you the Spirit, sir, whose coming was foretold to me?&#34; asked Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0467">&#34;I am!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0468">The voice was soft and gentle. </span>
      <span id="f0469">Singularly low, as if instead of being so close beside him, it were at a distance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0470">&#34;Who, and what are you?&#34; Scrooge demanded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0471">&#34;I am the Ghost of Christmas Past.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0472">&#34;Long Past?&#34; inquired Scrooge: observant of its dwarfish stature.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0473">&#34;No. </span>
      <span id="f0474">Your past.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0475">Perhaps, Scrooge could not have told anybody why, if anybody could have asked him; but he had a special desire to see the Spirit in his cap; and begged him to be covered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0476">&#34;What!&#34; exclaimed the Ghost, &#34;would you so soon put out, with worldly hands, the light I give? </span>
      <span id="f0477">Is it not enough that you are one of those whose passions made this cap, and force me through whole trains of years to wear it low upon my brow!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0478">Scrooge reverently disclaimed all intention to offend or any knowledge of having wilfully &#34;bonneted&#34; the Spirit at any period of his life. </span>
      <span id="f0479">He then made bold to inquire what business brought him there.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0480">&#34;Your welfare!&#34; said the Ghost.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0481">Scrooge expressed himself much obliged, but could not help thinking that a night of unbroken rest would have been more conducive to that end. </span>
      <span id="f0482">The Spirit must have heard him thinking, for it said immediately:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0483">&#34;Your reclamation, then. </span>
      <span id="f0484">Take heed!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0485">It put out its strong hand as it spoke, and clasped him gently by the arm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0486">&#34;Rise! </span>
      <span id="f0487">and walk with me!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0488">It would have been in vain for Scrooge to plead that the weather and the hour were not adapted to pedestrian purposes; that bed was warm, and the thermometer a long way below freezing; that he was clad but lightly in his slippers, dressing-gown, and nightcap; and that he had a cold upon him at that time. </span>
      <span id="f0489">The grasp, though gentle as a woman&#39;s hand, was not to be resisted. </span>
      <span id="f0490">He rose: but finding that the Spirit made towards the window, clasped his robe in supplication.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0491">&#34;I am a mortal,&#34; Scrooge remonstrated, &#34;and liable to fall.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0492">&#34;Bear but a touch of my hand there,&#34; said the Spirit, laying it upon his heart, &#34;and you shall be upheld in more than this!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0493">As the words were spoken, they passed through the wall, and stood upon an open country road, with fields on either hand. </span>
      <span id="f0494">The city had entirely vanished. </span>
      <span id="f0495">Not a vestige of it was to be seen. </span>
      <span id="f0496">The darkness and the mist had vanished with it, for it was a clear, cold, winter day, with snow upon the ground.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0497">&#34;Good Heaven!&#34; said Scrooge, clasping his hands together, as he looked about him. </span>
      <span id="f0498">&#34;I was bred in this place. </span>
      <span id="f0499">I was a boy here!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0500">The Spirit gazed upon him mildly. </span>
      <span id="f0501">Its gentle touch, though it had been light and instantaneous, appeared still present to the old man&#39;s sense of feeling. </span>
      <span id="f0502">He was conscious of a thousand odours floating in the air, each one connected with a thousand thoughts, and hopes, and joys, and cares long, long, forgotten!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0503">&#34;Your lip is trembling,&#34; said the Ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0504">&#34;And what is that upon your cheek?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0505">Scrooge muttered, with an unusual catching in his voice, that it was a pimple; and begged the Ghost to lead him where he would.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0506">&#34;You recollect the way?&#34; inquired the Spirit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0507">&#34;Remember it!&#34; cried Scrooge with fervour; &#34;I could walk it blindfold.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0508">&#34;Strange to have forgotten it for so many years!&#34; observed the Ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0509">&#34;Let us go on.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0510">They walked along the road, Scrooge recognising every gate, and post, and tree; until a little market-town appeared in the distance, with its bridge, its church, and winding river. </span>
      <span id="f0511">Some shaggy ponies now were seen trotting towards them with boys upon their backs, who called to other boys in country gigs and carts, driven by farmers. </span>
      <span id="f0512">All these boys were in great spirits, and shouted to each other, until the broad fields were so full of merry music, that the crisp air laughed to hear it!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0513">&#34;These are but shadows of the things that have been,&#34; said the Ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0514">&#34;They have no consciousness of us.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0515">The jocund travellers came on; and as they came, Scrooge knew and named them every one. </span>
      <span id="f0516">Why was he rejoiced beyond all bounds to see them! </span>
      <span id="f0517">Why did his cold eye glisten, and his heart leap up as they went past! </span>
      <span id="f0518">Why was he filled with gladness when he heard them give each other Merry Christmas, as they parted at cross-roads and bye-ways, for their several homes! </span>
      <span id="f0519">What was merry Christmas to Scrooge? </span>
      <span id="f0520">Out upon merry Christmas! </span>
      <span id="f0521">What good had it ever done to him?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0522">&#34;The school is not quite deserted,&#34; said the Ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0523">&#34;A solitary child, neglected by his friends, is left there still.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0524">Scrooge said he knew it. </span>
      <span id="f0525">And he sobbed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0526">They left the high-road, by a well-remembered lane, and soon approached a mansion of dull red brick, with a little weathercock-surmounted cupola, on the roof, and a bell hanging in it. </span>
      <span id="f0527">It was a large house, but one of broken fortunes; for the spacious offices were little used, their walls were damp and mossy, their windows broken, and their gates decayed. </span>
      <span id="f0528">Fowls clucked and strutted in the stables; and the coach-houses and sheds were over-run with grass. </span>
      <span id="f0529">Nor was it more retentive of its ancient state, within; for entering the dreary hall, and glancing through the open doors of many rooms, they found them poorly furnished, cold, and vast. </span>
      <span id="f0530">There was an earthy savour in the air, a chilly bareness in the place, which associated itself somehow with too much getting up by candle-light, and not too much to eat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0531">They went, the Ghost and Scrooge, across the hall, to a door at the back of the house. </span>
      <span id="f0532">It opened before them, and disclosed a long, bare, melancholy room, made barer still by lines of plain deal forms and desks. </span>
      <span id="f0533">At one of these a lonely boy was reading near a feeble fire; and Scrooge sat down upon a form, and wept to see his poor forgotten self as he used to be.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0534">Not a latent echo in the house, not a squeak and scuffle from the mice behind the panelling, not a drip from the half-thawed water-spout in the dull yard behind, not a sigh among the leafless boughs of one despondent poplar, not the idle swinging of an empty store-house door, no, not a clicking in the fire, but fell upon the heart of Scrooge with a softening influence, and gave a freer passage to his tears.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0535">The Spirit touched him on the arm, and pointed to his younger self, intent upon his reading. </span>
      <span id="f0536">Suddenly a man, in foreign garments: wonderfully real and distinct to look at: stood outside the window, with an axe stuck in his belt, and leading by the bridle an ass laden with wood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0537">&#34;Why, it&#39;s Ali Baba!&#34; Scrooge exclaimed in ecstasy. </span>
      <span id="f0538">&#34;It&#39;s dear old honest Ali Baba! </span>
      <span id="f0539">Yes, yes, I know! </span>
      <span id="f0540">One Christmas time, when yonder solitary child was left here all alone, he did come, for the first time, just like that. </span>
      <span id="f0541">Poor boy! </span>
      <span id="f0542">And Valentine,&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;and his wild brother, Orson; there they go! </span>
      <span id="f0543">And what&#39;s his name, who was put down in his drawers, asleep, at the Gate of Damascus; don&#39;t you see him! </span>
      <span id="f0544">And the Sultan&#39;s Groom turned upside down by the Genii; there he is upon his head! </span>
      <span id="f0545">Serve him right. </span>
      <span id="f0546">I&#39;m glad of it. </span>
      <span id="f0547">What business had he to be married to the Princess!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0548">To hear Scrooge expending all the earnestness of his nature on such subjects, in a most extraordinary voice between laughing and crying; and to see his heightened and excited face; would have been a surprise to his business friends in the city, indeed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0549">&#34;There&#39;s the Parrot!&#34; cried Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0550">&#34;Green body and yellow tail, with a thing like a lettuce growing out of the top of his head; there he is! </span>
      <span id="f0551">Poor Robin Crusoe, he called him, when he came home again after sailing round the island. </span>
      <span id="f0552">&#39;Poor Robin Crusoe, where have you been, Robin Crusoe?&#39;  The man thought he was dreaming, but he wasn&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f0553">It was the Parrot, you know. </span>
      <span id="f0554">There goes Friday, running for his life to the little creek! </span>
      <span id="f0555">Halloa! </span>
      <span id="f0556">Hoop! </span>
      <span id="f0557">Halloo!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0558">Then, with a rapidity of transition very foreign to his usual character, he said, in pity for his former self, &#34;Poor boy!&#34; and cried again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0559">&#34;I wish,&#34; Scrooge muttered, putting his hand in his pocket, and looking about him, after drying his eyes with his cuff: &#34;but it&#39;s too late now.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0560">&#34;What is the matter?&#34; asked the Spirit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0561">&#34;Nothing,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0562">&#34;Nothing. </span>
      <span id="f0563">There was a boy singing a Christmas Carol at my door last night. </span>
      <span id="f0564">I should like to have given him something: that&#39;s all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0565">The Ghost smiled thoughtfully, and waved its hand: saying as it did so, &#34;Let us see another Christmas!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0566">Scrooge&#39;s former self grew larger at the words, and the room became a little darker and more dirty. </span>
      <span id="f0567">The panels shrunk, the windows cracked; fragments of plaster fell out of the ceiling, and the naked laths were shown instead; but how all this was brought about, Scrooge knew no more than you do. </span>
      <span id="f0568">He only knew that it was quite correct; that everything had happened so; that there he was, alone again, when all the other boys had gone home for the jolly holidays.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0569">He was not reading now, but walking up and down despairingly. </span>
      <span id="f0570">Scrooge looked at the Ghost, and with a mournful shaking of his head, glanced anxiously towards the door.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0571">It opened; and a little girl, much younger than the boy, came darting in, and putting her arms about his neck, and often kissing him, addressed him as her &#34;Dear, dear brother.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0572">&#34;I have come to bring you home, dear brother!&#34; said the child, clapping her tiny hands, and bending down to laugh. </span>
      <span id="f0573">&#34;To bring you home, home, home!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0574">&#34;Home, little Fan?&#34; returned the boy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0575">&#34;Yes!&#34; said the child, brimful of glee. </span>
      <span id="f0576">&#34;Home, for good and all. </span>
      <span id="f0577">Home, for ever and ever. </span>
      <span id="f0578">Father is so much kinder than he used to be, that home&#39;s like Heaven! </span>
      <span id="f0579">He spoke so gently to me one dear night when I was going to bed, that I was not afraid to ask him once more if you might come home; and he said Yes, you should; and sent me in a coach to bring you. </span>
      <span id="f0580">And you&#39;re to be a man!&#34; said the child, opening her eyes, &#34;and are never to come back here; but first, we&#39;re to be together all the Christmas long, and have the merriest time in all the world.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0581">&#34;You are quite a woman, little Fan!&#34; exclaimed the boy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0582">She clapped her hands and laughed, and tried to touch his head; but being too little, laughed again, and stood on tiptoe to embrace him. </span>
      <span id="f0583">Then she began to drag him, in her childish eagerness, towards the door; and he, nothing loth to go, accompanied her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0584">A terrible voice in the hall cried, &#34;Bring down Master Scrooge&#39;s box, there!&#34; and in the hall appeared the schoolmaster himself, who glared on Master Scrooge with a ferocious condescension, and threw him into a dreadful state of mind by shaking hands with him. </span>
      <span id="f0585">He then conveyed him and his sister into the veriest old well of a shivering best-parlour that ever was seen, where the maps upon the wall, and the celestial and terrestrial globes in the windows, were waxy with cold. </span>
      <span id="f0586">Here he produced a decanter of curiously light wine, and a block of curiously heavy cake, and administered instalments of those dainties to the young people: at the same time, sending out a meagre servant to offer a glass of &#34;something&#34; to the postboy, who answered that he thanked the gentleman, but if it was the same tap as he had tasted before, he had rather not. </span>
      <span id="f0587">Master Scrooge&#39;s trunk being by this time tied on to the top of the chaise, the children bade the schoolmaster good-bye right willingly; and getting into it, drove gaily down the garden-sweep: the quick wheels dashing the hoar-frost and snow from off the dark leaves of the evergreens like spray.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0588">&#34;Always a delicate creature, whom a breath might have withered,&#34; said the Ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0589">&#34;But she had a large heart!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0590">&#34;So she had,&#34; cried Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0591">&#34;You&#39;re right. </span>
      <span id="f0592">I will not gainsay it, Spirit. </span>
      <span id="f0593">God forbid!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0594">&#34;She died a woman,&#34; said the Ghost, &#34;and had, as I think, children.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0595">&#34;One child,&#34; Scrooge returned.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0596">&#34;True,&#34; said the Ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0597">&#34;Your nephew!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0598">Scrooge seemed uneasy in his mind; and answered briefly, &#34;Yes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0599">Although they had but that moment left the school behind them, they were now in the busy thoroughfares of a city, where shadowy passengers passed and repassed; where shadowy carts and coaches battled for the way, and all the strife and tumult of a real city were. </span>
      <span id="f0600">It was made plain enough, by the dressing of the shops, that here too it was Christmas time again; but it was evening, and the streets were lighted up.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0601">The Ghost stopped at a certain warehouse door, and asked Scrooge if he knew it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0602">&#34;Know it!&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0603">&#34;Was I apprenticed here!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0604">They went in. </span>
      <span id="f0605">At sight of an old gentleman in a Welsh wig, sitting behind such a high desk, that if he had been two inches taller he must have knocked his head against the ceiling, Scrooge cried in great excitement:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0606">&#34;Why, it&#39;s old Fezziwig! </span>
      <span id="f0607">Bless his heart; it&#39;s Fezziwig alive again!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0608">Old Fezziwig laid down his pen, and looked up at the clock, which pointed to the hour of seven. </span>
      <span id="f0609">He rubbed his hands; adjusted his capacious waistcoat; laughed all over himself, from his shoes to his organ of benevolence; and called out in a comfortable, oily, rich, fat, jovial voice:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0610">&#34;Yo ho, there! </span>
      <span id="f0611">Ebenezer! </span>
      <span id="f0612">Dick!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0613">Scrooge&#39;s former self, now grown a young man, came briskly in, accompanied by his fellow-&#39;prentice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0614">&#34;Dick Wilkins, to be sure!&#34; said Scrooge to the Ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0615">&#34;Bless me, yes. </span>
      <span id="f0616">There he is. </span>
      <span id="f0617">He was very much attached to me, was Dick. </span>
      <span id="f0618">Poor Dick! </span>
      <span id="f0619">Dear, dear!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0620">&#34;Yo ho, my boys!&#34; said Fezziwig. </span>
      <span id="f0621">&#34;No more work to-night. </span>
      <span id="f0622">Christmas Eve, Dick. </span>
      <span id="f0623">Christmas, Ebenezer! </span>
      <span id="f0624">Let&#39;s have the shutters up,&#34; cried old Fezziwig, with a sharp clap of his hands, &#34;before a man can say Jack Robinson!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0625">You wouldn&#39;t believe how those two fellows went at it! </span>
      <span id="f0626">They charged into the street with the shutters--one, two, three--had &#39;em up in their places--four, five, six--barred &#39;em and pinned &#39;em--seven, eight, nine--and came back before you could have got to twelve, panting like race-horses.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0627">&#34;Hilli-ho!&#34; cried old Fezziwig, skipping down from the high desk, with wonderful agility. </span>
      <span id="f0628">&#34;Clear away, my lads, and let&#39;s have lots of room here! </span>
      <span id="f0629">Hilli-ho, Dick! </span>
      <span id="f0630">Chirrup, Ebenezer!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0631">Clear away! </span>
      <span id="f0632">There was nothing they wouldn&#39;t have cleared away, or couldn&#39;t have cleared away, with old Fezziwig looking on. </span>
      <span id="f0633">It was done in a minute. </span>
      <span id="f0634">Every movable was packed off, as if it were dismissed from public life for evermore; the floor was swept and watered, the lamps were trimmed, fuel was heaped upon the fire; and the warehouse was as snug, and warm, and dry, and bright a ball-room, as you would desire to see upon a winter&#39;s night.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0635">In came a fiddler with a music-book, and went up to the lofty desk, and made an orchestra of it, and tuned like fifty stomach-aches. </span>
      <span id="f0636">In came Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0637">Fezziwig, one vast substantial smile. </span>
      <span id="f0638">In came the three Miss Fezziwigs, beaming and lovable. </span>
      <span id="f0639">In came the six young followers whose hearts they broke. </span>
      <span id="f0640">In came all the young men and women employed in the business. </span>
      <span id="f0641">In came the housemaid, with her cousin, the baker. </span>
      <span id="f0642">In came the cook, with her brother&#39;s particular friend, the milkman. </span>
      <span id="f0643">In came the boy from over the way, who was suspected of not having board enough from his master; trying to hide himself behind the girl from next door but one, who was proved to have had her ears pulled by her mistress. </span>
      <span id="f0644">In they all came, one after another; some shyly, some boldly, some gracefully, some awkwardly, some pushing, some pulling; in they all came, anyhow and everyhow. </span>
      <span id="f0645">Away they all went, twenty couple at once; hands half round and back again the other way; down the middle and up again; round and round in various stages of affectionate grouping; old top couple always turning up in the wrong place; new top couple starting off again, as soon as they got there; all top couples at last, and not a bottom one to help them! </span>
      <span id="f0646">When this result was brought about, old Fezziwig, clapping his hands to stop the dance, cried out, &#34;Well done!&#34; and the fiddler plunged his hot face into a pot of porter, especially provided for that purpose. </span>
      <span id="f0647">But scorning rest, upon his reappearance, he instantly began again, though there were no dancers yet, as if the other fiddler had been carried home, exhausted, on a shutter, and he were a bran-new man resolved to beat him out of sight, or perish.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0648">There were more dances, and there were forfeits, and more dances, and there was cake, and there was negus, and there was a great piece of Cold Roast, and there was a great piece of Cold Boiled, and there were mince-pies, and plenty of beer. </span>
      <span id="f0649">But the great effect of the evening came after the Roast and Boiled, when the fiddler (an artful dog, mind! </span>
      <span id="f0650">The sort of man who knew his business better than you or I could have told it him!) struck up &#34;Sir Roger de Coverley.&#34;  Then old Fezziwig stood out to dance with Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0651">Fezziwig. </span>
      <span id="f0652">Top couple, too; with a good stiff piece of work cut out for them; three or four and twenty pair of partners; people who were not to be trifled with; people who would dance, and had no notion of walking.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0653">But if they had been twice as many--ah, four times--old Fezziwig would have been a match for them, and so would Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0654">Fezziwig. </span>
      <span id="f0655">As to her, she was worthy to be his partner in every sense of the term. </span>
      <span id="f0656">If that&#39;s not high praise, tell me higher, and I&#39;ll use it. </span>
      <span id="f0657">A positive light appeared to issue from Fezziwig&#39;s calves. </span>
      <span id="f0658">They shone in every part of the dance like moons. </span>
      <span id="f0659">You couldn&#39;t have predicted, at any given time, what would have become of them next. </span>
      <span id="f0660">And when old Fezziwig and Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0661">Fezziwig had gone all through the dance; advance and retire, both hands to your partner, bow and curtsey, corkscrew, thread-the-needle, and back again to your place; Fezziwig &#34;cut&#34;--cut so deftly, that he appeared to wink with his legs, and came upon his feet again without a stagger.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0662">When the clock struck eleven, this domestic ball broke up. </span>
      <span id="f0663">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0664">and Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0665">Fezziwig took their stations, one on either side of the door, and shaking hands with every person individually as he or she went out, wished him or her a Merry Christmas. </span>
      <span id="f0666">When everybody had retired but the two &#39;prentices, they did the same to them; and thus the cheerful voices died away, and the lads were left to their beds; which were under a counter in the back-shop.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0667">During the whole of this time, Scrooge had acted like a man out of his wits. </span>
      <span id="f0668">His heart and soul were in the scene, and with his former self. </span>
      <span id="f0669">He corroborated everything, remembered everything, enjoyed everything, and underwent the strangest agitation. </span>
      <span id="f0670">It was not until now, when the bright faces of his former self and Dick were turned from them, that he remembered the Ghost, and became conscious that it was looking full upon him, while the light upon its head burnt very clear.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0671">&#34;A small matter,&#34; said the Ghost, &#34;to make these silly folks so full of gratitude.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0672">&#34;Small!&#34; echoed Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0673">The Spirit signed to him to listen to the two apprentices, who were pouring out their hearts in praise of Fezziwig: and when he had done so, said,</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0674">&#34;Why! </span>
      <span id="f0675">Is it not? </span>
      <span id="f0676">He has spent but a few pounds of your mortal money: three or four perhaps. </span>
      <span id="f0677">Is that so much that he deserves this praise?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0678">&#34;It isn&#39;t that,&#34; said Scrooge, heated by the remark, and speaking unconsciously like his former, not his latter, self. </span>
      <span id="f0679">&#34;It isn&#39;t that, Spirit. </span>
      <span id="f0680">He has the power to render us happy or unhappy; to make our service light or burdensome; a pleasure or a toil. </span>
      <span id="f0681">Say that his power lies in words and looks; in things so slight and insignificant that it is impossible to add and count &#39;em up: what then? </span>
      <span id="f0682">The happiness he gives, is quite as great as if it cost a fortune.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0683">He felt the Spirit&#39;s glance, and stopped.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0684">&#34;What is the matter?&#34; asked the Ghost.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0685">&#34;Nothing particular,&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0686">&#34;Something, I think?&#34; the Ghost insisted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0687">&#34;No,&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;No. </span>
      <span id="f0688">I should like to be able to say a word or two to my clerk just now. </span>
      <span id="f0689">That&#39;s all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0690">His former self turned down the lamps as he gave utterance to the wish; and Scrooge and the Ghost again stood side by side in the open air.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0691">&#34;My time grows short,&#34; observed the Spirit. </span>
      <span id="f0692">&#34;Quick!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0693">This was not addressed to Scrooge, or to any one whom he could see, but it produced an immediate effect. </span>
      <span id="f0694">For again Scrooge saw himself. </span>
      <span id="f0695">He was older now; a man in the prime of life. </span>
      <span id="f0696">His face had not the harsh and rigid lines of later years; but it had begun to wear the signs of care and avarice. </span>
      <span id="f0697">There was an eager, greedy, restless motion in the eye, which showed the passion that had taken root, and where the shadow of the growing tree would fall.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0698">He was not alone, but sat by the side of a fair young girl in a mourning-dress: in whose eyes there were tears, which sparkled in the light that shone out of the Ghost of Christmas Past.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0699">&#34;It matters little,&#34; she said, softly. </span>
      <span id="f0700">&#34;To you, very little. </span>
      <span id="f0701">Another idol has displaced me; and if it can cheer and comfort you in time to come, as I would have tried to do, I have no just cause to grieve.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0702">&#34;What Idol has displaced you?&#34; he rejoined.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0703">&#34;A golden one.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0704">&#34;This is the even-handed dealing of the world!&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f0705">&#34;There is nothing on which it is so hard as poverty; and there is nothing it professes to condemn with such severity as the pursuit of wealth!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0706">&#34;You fear the world too much,&#34; she answered, gently. </span>
      <span id="f0707">&#34;All your other hopes have merged into the hope of being beyond the chance of its sordid reproach. </span>
      <span id="f0708">I have seen your nobler aspirations fall off one by one, until the master-passion, Gain, engrosses you. </span>
      <span id="f0709">Have I not?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0710">&#34;What then?&#34; he retorted. </span>
      <span id="f0711">&#34;Even if I have grown so much wiser, what then? </span>
      <span id="f0712">I am not changed towards you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0713">She shook her head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0714">&#34;Am I?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0715">&#34;Our contract is an old one. </span>
      <span id="f0716">It was made when we were both poor and content to be so, until, in good season, we could improve our worldly fortune by our patient industry. </span>
      <span id="f0717">You are changed. </span>
      <span id="f0718">When it was made, you were another man.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0719">&#34;I was a boy,&#34; he said impatiently.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0720">&#34;Your own feeling tells you that you were not what you are,&#34; she returned. </span>
      <span id="f0721">&#34;I am. </span>
      <span id="f0722">That which promised happiness when we were one in heart, is fraught with misery now that we are two. </span>
      <span id="f0723">How often and how keenly I have thought of this, I will not say. </span>
      <span id="f0724">It is enough that I have thought of it, and can release you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0725">&#34;Have I ever sought release?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0726">&#34;In words. </span>
      <span id="f0727">No. </span>
      <span id="f0728">Never.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0729">&#34;In what, then?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0730">&#34;In a changed nature; in an altered spirit; in another atmosphere of life; another Hope as its great end. </span>
      <span id="f0731">In everything that made my love of any worth or value in your sight. </span>
      <span id="f0732">If this had never been between us,&#34; said the girl, looking mildly, but with steadiness, upon him; &#34;tell me, would you seek me out and try to win me now? </span>
      <span id="f0733">Ah, no!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0734">He seemed to yield to the justice of this supposition, in spite of himself. </span>
      <span id="f0735">But he said with a struggle, &#34;You think not.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0736">&#34;I would gladly think otherwise if I could,&#34; she answered, &#34;Heaven knows! </span>
      <span id="f0737">When I have learned a Truth like this, I know how strong and irresistible it must be. </span>
      <span id="f0738">But if you were free to-day, to-morrow, yesterday, can even I believe that you would choose a dowerless girl--you who, in your very confidence with her, weigh everything by Gain: or, choosing her, if for a moment you were false enough to your one guiding principle to do so, do I not know that your repentance and regret would surely follow? </span>
      <span id="f0739">I do; and I release you. </span>
      <span id="f0740">With a full heart, for the love of him you once were.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0741">He was about to speak; but with her head turned from him, she resumed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0742">&#34;You may--the memory of what is past half makes me hope you will--have pain in this. </span>
      <span id="f0743">A very, very brief time, and you will dismiss the recollection of it, gladly, as an unprofitable dream, from which it happened well that you awoke. </span>
      <span id="f0744">May you be happy in the life you have chosen!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0745">She left him, and they parted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0746">&#34;Spirit!&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;show me no more! </span>
      <span id="f0747">Conduct me home. </span>
      <span id="f0748">Why do you delight to torture me?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0749">&#34;One shadow more!&#34; exclaimed the Ghost.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0750">&#34;No more!&#34; cried Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0751">&#34;No more. </span>
      <span id="f0752">I don&#39;t wish to see it. </span>
      <span id="f0753">Show me no more!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0754">But the relentless Ghost pinioned him in both his arms, and forced him to observe what happened next.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0755">They were in another scene and place; a room, not very large or handsome, but full of comfort. </span>
      <span id="f0756">Near to the winter fire sat a beautiful young girl, so like that last that Scrooge believed it was the same, until he saw her, now a comely matron, sitting opposite her daughter. </span>
      <span id="f0757">The noise in this room was perfectly tumultuous, for there were more children there, than Scrooge in his agitated state of mind could count; and, unlike the celebrated herd in the poem, they were not forty children conducting themselves like one, but every child was conducting itself like forty. </span>
      <span id="f0758">The consequences were uproarious beyond belief; but no one seemed to care; on the contrary, the mother and daughter laughed heartily, and enjoyed it very much; and the latter, soon beginning to mingle in the sports, got pillaged by the young brigands most ruthlessly. </span>
      <span id="f0759">What would I not have given to be one of them! </span>
      <span id="f0760">Though I never could have been so rude, no, no! </span>
      <span id="f0761">I wouldn&#39;t for the wealth of all the world have crushed that braided hair, and torn it down; and for the precious little shoe, I wouldn&#39;t have plucked it off, God bless my soul! </span>
      <span id="f0762">to save my life. </span>
      <span id="f0763">As to measuring her waist in sport, as they did, bold young brood, I couldn&#39;t have done it; I should have expected my arm to have grown round it for a punishment, and never come straight again. </span>
      <span id="f0764">And yet I should have dearly liked, I own, to have touched her lips; to have questioned her, that she might have opened them; to have looked upon the lashes of her downcast eyes, and never raised a blush; to have let loose waves of hair, an inch of which would be a keepsake beyond price: in short, I should have liked, I do confess, to have had the lightest licence of a child, and yet to have been man enough to know its value.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0765">But now a knocking at the door was heard, and such a rush immediately ensued that she with laughing face and plundered dress was borne towards it the centre of a flushed and boisterous group, just in time to greet the father, who came home attended by a man laden with Christmas toys and presents. </span>
      <span id="f0766">Then the shouting and the struggling, and the onslaught that was made on the defenceless porter! </span>
      <span id="f0767">The scaling him with chairs for ladders to dive into his pockets, despoil him of brown-paper parcels, hold on tight by his cravat, hug him round his neck, pommel his back, and kick his legs in irrepressible affection! </span>
      <span id="f0768">The shouts of wonder and delight with which the development of every package was received! </span>
      <span id="f0769">The terrible announcement that the baby had been taken in the act of putting a doll&#39;s frying-pan into his mouth, and was more than suspected of having swallowed a fictitious turkey, glued on a wooden platter! </span>
      <span id="f0770">The immense relief of finding this a false alarm! </span>
      <span id="f0771">The joy, and gratitude, and ecstasy! </span>
      <span id="f0772">They are all indescribable alike. </span>
      <span id="f0773">It is enough that by degrees the children and their emotions got out of the parlour, and by one stair at a time, up to the top of the house; where they went to bed, and so subsided.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0774">And now Scrooge looked on more attentively than ever, when the master of the house, having his daughter leaning fondly on him, sat down with her and her mother at his own fireside; and when he thought that such another creature, quite as graceful and as full of promise, might have called him father, and been a spring-time in the haggard winter of his life, his sight grew very dim indeed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0775">&#34;Belle,&#34; said the husband, turning to his wife with a smile, &#34;I saw an old friend of yours this afternoon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0776">&#34;Who was it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0777">&#34;Guess!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0778">&#34;How can I? </span>
      <span id="f0779">Tut, don&#39;t I know?&#34; she added in the same breath, laughing as he laughed. </span>
      <span id="f0780">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0781">Scrooge.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0782">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0783">Scrooge it was. </span>
      <span id="f0784">I passed his office window; and as it was not shut up, and he had a candle inside, I could scarcely help seeing him. </span>
      <span id="f0785">His partner lies upon the point of death, I hear; and there he sat alone. </span>
      <span id="f0786">Quite alone in the world, I do believe.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0787">&#34;Spirit!&#34; said Scrooge in a broken voice, &#34;remove me from this place.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0788">&#34;I told you these were shadows of the things that have been,&#34; said the Ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0789">&#34;That they are what they are, do not blame me!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0790">&#34;Remove me!&#34; Scrooge exclaimed, &#34;I cannot bear it!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0791">He turned upon the Ghost, and seeing that it looked upon him with a face, in which in some strange way there were fragments of all the faces it had shown him, wrestled with it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0792">&#34;Leave me! </span>
      <span id="f0793">Take me back. </span>
      <span id="f0794">Haunt me no longer!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0795">In the struggle, if that can be called a struggle in which the Ghost with no visible resistance on its own part was undisturbed by any effort of its adversary, Scrooge observed that its light was burning high and bright; and dimly connecting that with its influence over him, he seized the extinguisher-cap, and by a sudden action pressed it down upon its head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0796">The Spirit dropped beneath it, so that the extinguisher covered its whole form; but though Scrooge pressed it down with all his force, he could not hide the light: which streamed from under it, in an unbroken flood upon the ground.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0797">He was conscious of being exhausted, and overcome by an irresistible drowsiness; and, further, of being in his own bedroom. </span>
      <span id="f0798"> He gave the cap a parting squeeze, in which his hand relaxed; and had barely time to reel to bed, before he sank into a heavy sleep.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>