<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>STAVE III:  THE SECOND OF THE THREE SPIRITS</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0799">STAVE III:  THE SECOND OF THE THREE SPIRITS</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0800">AWAKING in the middle of a prodigiously tough snore, and sitting up in bed to get his thoughts together, Scrooge had no occasion to be told that the bell was again upon the stroke of One. </span>
      <span id="f0801">He felt that he was restored to consciousness in the right nick of time, for the especial purpose of holding a conference with the second messenger despatched to him through Jacob Marley&#39;s intervention. </span>
      <span id="f0802">But finding that he turned uncomfortably cold when he began to wonder which of his curtains this new spectre would draw back, he put them every one aside with his own hands; and lying down again, established a sharp look-out all round the bed. </span>
      <span id="f0803">For he wished to challenge the Spirit on the moment of its appearance, and did not wish to be taken by surprise, and made nervous.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0804">Gentlemen of the free-and-easy sort, who plume themselves on being acquainted with a move or two, and being usually equal to the time-of-day, express the wide range of their capacity for adventure by observing that they are good for anything from pitch-and-toss to manslaughter; between which opposite extremes, no doubt, there lies a tolerably wide and comprehensive range of subjects. </span>
      <span id="f0805">Without venturing for Scrooge quite as hardily as this, I don&#39;t mind calling on you to believe that he was ready for a good broad field of strange appearances, and that nothing between a baby and rhinoceros would have astonished him very much.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0806">Now, being prepared for almost anything, he was not by any means prepared for nothing; and, consequently, when the Bell struck One, and no shape appeared, he was taken with a violent fit of trembling. </span>
      <span id="f0807">Five minutes, ten minutes, a quarter of an hour went by, yet nothing came. </span>
      <span id="f0808">All this time, he lay upon his bed, the very core and centre of a blaze of ruddy light, which streamed upon it when the clock proclaimed the hour; and which, being only light, was more alarming than a dozen ghosts, as he was powerless to make out what it meant, or would be at; and was sometimes apprehensive that he might be at that very moment an interesting case of spontaneous combustion, without having the consolation of knowing it. </span>
      <span id="f0809">At last, however, he began to think--as you or I would have thought at first; for it is always the person not in the predicament who knows what ought to have been done in it, and would unquestionably have done it too--at last, I say, he began to think that the source and secret of this ghostly light might be in the adjoining room, from whence, on further tracing it, it seemed to shine. </span>
      <span id="f0810">This idea taking full possession of his mind, he got up softly and shuffled in his slippers to the door.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0811">The moment Scrooge&#39;s hand was on the lock, a strange voice called him by his name, and bade him enter. </span>
      <span id="f0812">He obeyed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0813">It was his own room. </span>
      <span id="f0814">There was no doubt about that. </span>
      <span id="f0815">But it had undergone a surprising transformation. </span>
      <span id="f0816">The walls and ceiling were so hung with living green, that it looked a perfect grove; from every part of which, bright gleaming berries glistened. </span>
      <span id="f0817">The crisp leaves of holly, mistletoe, and ivy reflected back the light, as if so many little mirrors had been scattered there; and such a mighty blaze went roaring up the chimney, as that dull petrification of a hearth had never known in Scrooge&#39;s time, or Marley&#39;s, or for many and many a winter season gone. </span>
      <span id="f0818">Heaped up on the floor, to form a kind of throne, were turkeys, geese, game, poultry, brawn, great joints of meat, sucking-pigs, long wreaths of sausages, mince-pies, plum-puddings, barrels of oysters, red-hot chestnuts, cherry-cheeked apples, juicy oranges, luscious pears, immense twelfth-cakes, and seething bowls of punch, that made the chamber dim with their delicious steam. </span>
      <span id="f0819">In easy state upon this couch, there sat a jolly Giant, glorious to see; who bore a glowing torch, in shape not unlike Plenty&#39;s horn, and held it up, high up, to shed its light on Scrooge, as he came peeping round the door.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0820">&#34;Come in!&#34; exclaimed the Ghost. </span>
      <span id="f0821">&#34;Come in! </span>
      <span id="f0822">and know me better, man!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0823">Scrooge entered timidly, and hung his head before this Spirit. </span>
      <span id="f0824">He was not the dogged Scrooge he had been; and though the Spirit&#39;s eyes were clear and kind, he did not like to meet them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0825">&#34;I am the Ghost of Christmas Present,&#34; said the Spirit. </span>
      <span id="f0826">&#34;Look upon me!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0827">Scrooge reverently did so. </span>
      <span id="f0828">It was clothed in one simple green robe, or mantle, bordered with white fur. </span>
      <span id="f0829">This garment hung so loosely on the figure, that its capacious breast was bare, as if disdaining to be warded or concealed by any artifice. </span>
      <span id="f0830">Its feet, observable beneath the ample folds of the garment, were also bare; and on its head it wore no other covering than a holly wreath, set here and there with shining icicles. </span>
      <span id="f0831">Its dark brown curls were long and free; free as its genial face, its sparkling eye, its open hand, its cheery voice, its unconstrained demeanour, and its joyful air. </span>
      <span id="f0832">Girded round its middle was an antique scabbard; but no sword was in it, and the ancient sheath was eaten up with rust.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0833">&#34;You have never seen the like of me before!&#34; exclaimed the Spirit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0834">&#34;Never,&#34; Scrooge made answer to it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0835">&#34;Have never walked forth with the younger members of my family; meaning (for I am very young) my elder brothers born in these later years?&#34; pursued the Phantom.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0836">&#34;I don&#39;t think I have,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0837">&#34;I am afraid I have not. </span>
      <span id="f0838">Have you had many brothers, Spirit?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0839">&#34;More than eighteen hundred,&#34; said the Ghost.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0840">&#34;A tremendous family to provide for!&#34; muttered Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0841">The Ghost of Christmas Present rose.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0842">&#34;Spirit,&#34; said Scrooge submissively, &#34;conduct me where you will. </span>
      <span id="f0843">I went forth last night on compulsion, and I learnt a lesson which is working now. </span>
      <span id="f0844">To-night, if you have aught to teach me, let me profit by it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0845">&#34;Touch my robe!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0846">Scrooge did as he was told, and held it fast.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0847">Holly, mistletoe, red berries, ivy, turkeys, geese, game, poultry, brawn, meat, pigs, sausages, oysters, pies, puddings, fruit, and punch, all vanished instantly. </span>
      <span id="f0848">So did the room, the fire, the ruddy glow, the hour of night, and they stood in the city streets on Christmas morning, where (for the weather was severe) the people made a rough, but brisk and not unpleasant kind of music, in scraping the snow from the pavement in front of their dwellings, and from the tops of their houses, whence it was mad delight to the boys to see it come plumping down into the road below, and splitting into artificial little snow-storms.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0849">The house fronts looked black enough, and the windows blacker, contrasting with the smooth white sheet of snow upon the roofs, and with the dirtier snow upon the ground; which last deposit had been ploughed up in deep furrows by the heavy wheels of carts and waggons; furrows that crossed and re-crossed each other hundreds of times where the great streets branched off; and made intricate channels, hard to trace in the thick yellow mud and icy water. </span>
      <span id="f0850">The sky was gloomy, and the shortest streets were choked up with a dingy mist, half thawed, half frozen, whose heavier particles descended in a shower of sooty atoms, as if all the chimneys in Great Britain had, by one consent, caught fire, and were blazing away to their dear hearts&#39; content. </span>
      <span id="f0851">There was nothing very cheerful in the climate or the town, and yet was there an air of cheerfulness abroad that the clearest summer air and brightest summer sun might have endeavoured to diffuse in vain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0852">For, the people who were shovelling away on the housetops were jovial and full of glee; calling out to one another from the parapets, and now and then exchanging a facetious snowball--better-natured missile far than many a wordy jest-- laughing heartily if it went right and not less heartily if it went wrong. </span>
      <span id="f0853">The poulterers&#39; shops were still half open, and the fruiterers&#39; were radiant in their glory. </span>
      <span id="f0854">There were great, round, pot-bellied baskets of chestnuts, shaped like the waistcoats of jolly old gentlemen, lolling at the doors, and tumbling out into the street in their apoplectic opulence. </span>
      <span id="f0855">There were ruddy, brown-faced, broad-girthed Spanish Onions, shining in the fatness of their growth like Spanish Friars, and winking from their shelves in wanton slyness at the girls as they went by, and glanced demurely at the hung-up mistletoe. </span>
      <span id="f0856">There were pears and apples, clustered high in blooming pyramids; there were bunches of grapes, made, in the shopkeepers&#39; benevolence to dangle from conspicuous hooks, that people&#39;s mouths might water gratis as they passed; there were piles of filberts, mossy and brown, recalling, in their fragrance, ancient walks among the woods, and pleasant shufflings ankle deep through withered leaves; there were Norfolk Biffins, squat and swarthy, setting off the yellow of the oranges and lemons, and, in the great compactness of their juicy persons, urgently entreating and beseeching to be carried home in paper bags and eaten after dinner. </span>
      <span id="f0857">The very gold and silver fish, set forth among these choice fruits in a bowl, though members of a dull and stagnant-blooded race, appeared to know that there was something going on; and, to a fish, went gasping round and round their little world in slow and passionless excitement.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0858">The Grocers&#39;! </span>
      <span id="f0859">oh, the Grocers&#39;! </span>
      <span id="f0860">nearly closed, with perhaps two shutters down, or one; but through those gaps such glimpses! </span>
      <span id="f0861">It was not alone that the scales descending on the counter made a merry sound, or that the twine and roller parted company so briskly, or that the canisters were rattled up and down like juggling tricks, or even that the blended scents of tea and coffee were so grateful to the nose, or even that the raisins were so plentiful and rare, the almonds so extremely white, the sticks of cinnamon so long and straight, the other spices so delicious, the candied fruits so caked and spotted with molten sugar as to make the coldest lookers-on feel faint and subsequently bilious. </span>
      <span id="f0862">Nor was it that the figs were moist and pulpy, or that the French plums blushed in modest tartness from their highly-decorated boxes, or that everything was good to eat and in its Christmas dress; but the customers were all so hurried and so eager in the hopeful promise of the day, that they tumbled up against each other at the door, crashing their wicker baskets wildly, and left their purchases upon the counter, and came running back to fetch them, and committed hundreds of the like mistakes, in the best humour possible; while the Grocer and his people were so frank and fresh that the polished hearts with which they fastened their aprons behind might have been their own, worn outside for general inspection, and for Christmas daws to peck at if they chose.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0863">But soon the steeples called good people all, to church and chapel, and away they came, flocking through the streets in their best clothes, and with their gayest faces. </span>
      <span id="f0864">And at the same time there emerged from scores of bye-streets, lanes, and nameless turnings, innumerable people, carrying their dinners to the bakers&#39; shops. </span>
      <span id="f0865">The sight of these poor revellers appeared to interest the Spirit very much, for he stood with Scrooge beside him in a baker&#39;s doorway, and taking off the covers as their bearers passed, sprinkled incense on their dinners from his torch. </span>
      <span id="f0866">And it was a very uncommon kind of torch, for once or twice when there were angry words between some dinner-carriers who had jostled each other, he shed a few drops of water on them from it, and their good humour was restored directly. </span>
      <span id="f0867">For they said, it was a shame to quarrel upon Christmas Day. </span>
      <span id="f0868">And so it was! </span>
      <span id="f0869">God love it, so it was!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0870">In time the bells ceased, and the bakers were shut up; and yet there was a genial shadowing forth of all these dinners and the progress of their cooking, in the thawed blotch of wet above each baker&#39;s oven; where the pavement smoked as if its stones were cooking too.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0871">&#34;Is there a peculiar flavour in what you sprinkle from your torch?&#34; asked Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0872">&#34;There is. </span>
      <span id="f0873">My own.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0874">&#34;Would it apply to any kind of dinner on this day?&#34; asked Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0875">&#34;To any kindly given. </span>
      <span id="f0876">To a poor one most.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0877">&#34;Why to a poor one most?&#34; asked Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0878">&#34;Because it needs it most.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0879">&#34;Spirit,&#34; said Scrooge, after a moment&#39;s thought, &#34;I wonder you, of all the beings in the many worlds about us, should desire to cramp these people&#39;s opportunities of innocent enjoyment.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0880">&#34;I!&#34; cried the Spirit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0881">&#34;You would deprive them of their means of dining every seventh day, often the only day on which they can be said to dine at all,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0882">&#34;Wouldn&#39;t you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0883">&#34;I!&#34; cried the Spirit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0884">&#34;You seek to close these places on the Seventh Day?&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0885">&#34;And it comes to the same thing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0886">&#34;I seek!&#34; exclaimed the Spirit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0887">&#34;Forgive me if I am wrong. </span>
      <span id="f0888">It has been done in your name, or at least in that of your family,&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0889">&#34;There are some upon this earth of yours,&#34; returned the Spirit, &#34;who lay claim to know us, and who do their deeds of passion, pride, ill-will, hatred, envy, bigotry, and selfishness in our name, who are as strange to us and all our kith and kin, as if they had never lived. </span>
      <span id="f0890">Remember that, and charge their doings on themselves, not us.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0891">Scrooge promised that he would; and they went on, invisible, as they had been before, into the suburbs of the town. </span>
      <span id="f0892">It was a remarkable quality of the Ghost (which Scrooge had observed at the baker&#39;s), that notwithstanding his gigantic size, he could accommodate himself to any place with ease; and that he stood beneath a low roof quite as gracefully and like a supernatural creature, as it was possible he could have done in any lofty hall.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0893">And perhaps it was the pleasure the good Spirit had in showing off this power of his, or else it was his own kind, generous, hearty nature, and his sympathy with all poor men, that led him straight to Scrooge&#39;s clerk&#39;s; for there he went, and took Scrooge with him, holding to his robe; and on the threshold of the door the Spirit smiled, and stopped to bless Bob Cratchit&#39;s dwelling with the sprinkling of his torch. </span>
      <span id="f0894">Think of that! </span>
      <span id="f0895">Bob had but fifteen &#34;Bob&#34; a-week himself; he pocketed on Saturdays but fifteen copies of his Christian name; and yet the Ghost of Christmas Present blessed his four-roomed house!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0896">Then up rose Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0897">Cratchit, Cratchit&#39;s wife, dressed out but poorly in a twice-turned gown, but brave in ribbons, which are cheap and make a goodly show for sixpence; and she laid the cloth, assisted by Belinda Cratchit, second of her daughters, also brave in ribbons; while Master Peter Cratchit plunged a fork into the saucepan of potatoes, and getting the corners of his monstrous shirt collar (Bob&#39;s private property, conferred upon his son and heir in honour of the day) into his mouth, rejoiced to find himself so gallantly attired, and yearned to show his linen in the fashionable Parks. </span>
      <span id="f0898">And now two smaller Cratchits, boy and girl, came tearing in, screaming that outside the baker&#39;s they had smelt the goose, and known it for their own; and basking in luxurious thoughts of sage and onion, these young Cratchits danced about the table, and exalted Master Peter Cratchit to the skies, while he (not proud, although his collars nearly choked him) blew the fire, until the slow potatoes bubbling up, knocked loudly at the saucepan-lid to be let out and peeled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0899">&#34;What has ever got your precious father then?&#34; said Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0900">Cratchit. </span>
      <span id="f0901">&#34;And your brother, Tiny Tim! </span>
      <span id="f0902">And Martha warn&#39;t as late last Christmas Day by half-an-hour?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0903">&#34;Here&#39;s Martha, mother!&#34; said a girl, appearing as she spoke.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0904">&#34;Here&#39;s Martha, mother!&#34; cried the two young Cratchits. </span>
      <span id="f0905">&#34;Hurrah! </span>
      <span id="f0906">There&#39;s such a goose, Martha!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0907">&#34;Why, bless your heart alive, my dear, how late you are!&#34; said Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0908">Cratchit, kissing her a dozen times, and taking off her shawl and bonnet for her with officious zeal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0909">&#34;We&#39;d a deal of work to finish up last night,&#34; replied the girl, &#34;and had to clear away this morning, mother!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0910">&#34;Well! </span>
      <span id="f0911">Never mind so long as you are come,&#34; said Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0912">Cratchit. </span>
      <span id="f0913">&#34;Sit ye down before the fire, my dear, and have a warm, Lord bless ye!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0914">&#34;No, no! </span>
      <span id="f0915">There&#39;s father coming,&#34; cried the two young Cratchits, who were everywhere at once. </span>
      <span id="f0916">&#34;Hide, Martha, hide!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0917">So Martha hid herself, and in came little Bob, the father, with at least three feet of comforter exclusive of the fringe, hanging down before him; and his threadbare clothes darned up and brushed, to look seasonable; and Tiny Tim upon his shoulder. </span>
      <span id="f0918">Alas for Tiny Tim, he bore a little crutch, and had his limbs supported by an iron frame!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0919">&#34;Why, where&#39;s our Martha?&#34; cried Bob Cratchit, looking round.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0920">&#34;Not coming,&#34; said Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0921">Cratchit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0922">&#34;Not coming!&#34; said Bob, with a sudden declension in his high spirits; for he had been Tim&#39;s blood horse all the way from church, and had come home rampant. </span>
      <span id="f0923">&#34;Not coming upon Christmas Day!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0924">Martha didn&#39;t like to see him disappointed, if it were only in joke; so she came out prematurely from behind the closet door, and ran into his arms, while the two young Cratchits hustled Tiny Tim, and bore him off into the wash-house, that he might hear the pudding singing in the copper.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0925">&#34;And how did little Tim behave?&#34; asked Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0926">Cratchit, when she had rallied Bob on his credulity, and Bob had hugged his daughter to his heart&#39;s content.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0927">&#34;As good as gold,&#34; said Bob, &#34;and better. </span>
      <span id="f0928">Somehow he gets thoughtful, sitting by himself so much, and thinks the strangest things you ever heard. </span>
      <span id="f0929">He told me, coming home, that he hoped the people saw him in the church, because he was a cripple, and it might be pleasant to them to remember upon Christmas Day, who made lame beggars walk, and blind men see.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0930">Bob&#39;s voice was tremulous when he told them this, and trembled more when he said that Tiny Tim was growing strong and hearty.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0931">His active little crutch was heard upon the floor, and back came Tiny Tim before another word was spoken, escorted by his brother and sister to his stool before the fire; and while Bob, turning up his cuffs--as if, poor fellow, they were capable of being made more shabby--compounded some hot mixture in a jug with gin and lemons, and stirred it round and round and put it on the hob to simmer; Master Peter, and the two ubiquitous young Cratchits went to fetch the goose, with which they soon returned in high procession.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0932">Such a bustle ensued that you might have thought a goose the rarest of all birds; a feathered phenomenon, to which a black swan was a matter of course--and in truth it was something very like it in that house. </span>
      <span id="f0933">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0934">Cratchit made the gravy (ready beforehand in a little saucepan) hissing hot; Master Peter mashed the potatoes with incredible vigour; Miss Belinda sweetened up the apple-sauce; Martha dusted the hot plates; Bob took Tiny Tim beside him in a tiny corner at the table; the two young Cratchits set chairs for everybody, not forgetting themselves, and mounting guard upon their posts, crammed spoons into their mouths, lest they should shriek for goose before their turn came to be helped. </span>
      <span id="f0935">At last the dishes were set on, and grace was said. </span>
      <span id="f0936">It was succeeded by a breathless pause, as Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0937">Cratchit, looking slowly all along the carving-knife, prepared to plunge it in the breast; but when she did, and when the long expected gush of stuffing issued forth, one murmur of delight arose all round the board, and even Tiny Tim, excited by the two young Cratchits, beat on the table with the handle of his knife, and feebly cried Hurrah!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0938">There never was such a goose. </span>
      <span id="f0939">Bob said he didn&#39;t believe there ever was such a goose cooked. </span>
      <span id="f0940">Its tenderness and flavour, size and cheapness, were the themes of universal admiration. </span>
      <span id="f0941">Eked out by apple-sauce and mashed potatoes, it was a sufficient dinner for the whole family; indeed, as Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0942">Cratchit said with great delight (surveying one small atom of a bone upon the dish), they hadn&#39;t ate it all at last! </span>
      <span id="f0943">Yet every one had had enough, and the youngest Cratchits in particular, were steeped in sage and onion to the eyebrows! </span>
      <span id="f0944">But now, the plates being changed by Miss Belinda, Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0945">Cratchit left the room alone--too nervous to bear witnesses--to take the pudding up and bring it in.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0946">Suppose it should not be done enough! </span>
      <span id="f0947">Suppose it should break in turning out! </span>
      <span id="f0948">Suppose somebody should have got over the wall of the back-yard, and stolen it, while they were merry with the goose--a supposition at which the two young Cratchits became livid! </span>
      <span id="f0949">All sorts of horrors were supposed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0950">Hallo! </span>
      <span id="f0951">A great deal of steam! </span>
      <span id="f0952">The pudding was out of the copper. </span>
      <span id="f0953">A smell like a washing-day! </span>
      <span id="f0954">That was the cloth. </span>
      <span id="f0955">A smell like an eating-house and a pastrycook&#39;s next door to each other, with a laundress&#39;s next door to that! </span>
      <span id="f0956">That was the pudding! </span>
      <span id="f0957">In half a minute Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0958">Cratchit entered--flushed, but smiling proudly--with the pudding, like a speckled cannon-ball, so hard and firm, blazing in half of half-a-quartern of ignited brandy, and bedight with Christmas holly stuck into the top.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0959">Oh, a wonderful pudding! </span>
      <span id="f0960">Bob Cratchit said, and calmly too, that he regarded it as the greatest success achieved by Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0961">Cratchit since their marriage. </span>
      <span id="f0962">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f0963">Cratchit said that now the weight was off her mind, she would confess she had had her doubts about the quantity of flour. </span>
      <span id="f0964">Everybody had something to say about it, but nobody said or thought it was at all a small pudding for a large family. </span>
      <span id="f0965">It would have been flat heresy to do so. </span>
      <span id="f0966">Any Cratchit would have blushed to hint at such a thing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0967">At last the dinner was all done, the cloth was cleared, the hearth swept, and the fire made up. </span>
      <span id="f0968">The compound in the jug being tasted, and considered perfect, apples and oranges were put upon the table, and a shovel-full of chestnuts on the fire. </span>
      <span id="f0969">Then all the Cratchit family drew round the hearth, in what Bob Cratchit called a circle, meaning half a one; and at Bob Cratchit&#39;s elbow stood the family display of glass. </span>
      <span id="f0970">Two tumblers, and a custard-cup without a handle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0971">These held the hot stuff from the jug, however, as well as golden goblets would have done; and Bob served it out with beaming looks, while the chestnuts on the fire sputtered and cracked noisily. </span>
      <span id="f0972">Then Bob proposed:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0973">&#34;A Merry Christmas to us all, my dears. </span>
      <span id="f0974">God bless us!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0975">Which all the family re-echoed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0976">&#34;God bless us every one!&#34; said Tiny Tim, the last of all.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0977">He sat very close to his father&#39;s side upon his little stool. </span>
      <span id="f0978">Bob held his withered little hand in his, as if he loved the child, and wished to keep him by his side, and dreaded that he might be taken from him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0979">&#34;Spirit,&#34; said Scrooge, with an interest he had never felt before, &#34;tell me if Tiny Tim will live.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0980">&#34;I see a vacant seat,&#34; replied the Ghost, &#34;in the poor chimney-corner, and a crutch without an owner, carefully preserved. </span>
      <span id="f0981">If these shadows remain unaltered by the Future, the child will die.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0982">&#34;No, no,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f0983">&#34;Oh, no, kind Spirit! </span>
      <span id="f0984">say he will be spared.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0985">&#34;If these shadows remain unaltered by the Future, none other of my race,&#34; returned the Ghost, &#34;will find him here. </span>
      <span id="f0986">What then? </span>
      <span id="f0987">If he be like to die, he had better do it, and decrease the surplus population.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0988">Scrooge hung his head to hear his own words quoted by the Spirit, and was overcome with penitence and grief.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0989">&#34;Man,&#34; said the Ghost, &#34;if man you be in heart, not adamant, forbear that wicked cant until you have discovered What the surplus is, and Where it is. </span>
      <span id="f0990">Will you decide what men shall live, what men shall die? </span>
      <span id="f0991">It may be, that in the sight of Heaven, you are more worthless and less fit to live than millions like this poor man&#39;s child. </span>
      <span id="f0992">Oh God! </span>
      <span id="f0993">to hear the Insect on the leaf pronouncing on the too much life among his hungry brothers in the dust!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0994">Scrooge bent before the Ghost&#39;s rebuke, and trembling cast his eyes upon the ground. </span>
      <span id="f0995">But he raised them speedily, on hearing his own name.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0996">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0997">Scrooge!&#34; said Bob; &#34;I&#39;ll give you Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0998">Scrooge, the Founder of the Feast!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0999">&#34;The Founder of the Feast indeed!&#34; cried Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1000">Cratchit, reddening. </span>
      <span id="f1001">&#34;I wish I had him here. </span>
      <span id="f1002">I&#39;d give him a piece of my mind to feast upon, and I hope he&#39;d have a good appetite for it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1003">&#34;My dear,&#34; said Bob, &#34;the children! </span>
      <span id="f1004">Christmas Day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1005">&#34;It should be Christmas Day, I am sure,&#34; said she, &#34;on which one drinks the health of such an odious, stingy, hard, unfeeling man as Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1006">Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1007">You know he is, Robert! </span>
      <span id="f1008">Nobody knows it better than you do, poor fellow!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1009">&#34;My dear,&#34; was Bob&#39;s mild answer, &#34;Christmas Day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1010">&#34;I&#39;ll drink his health for your sake and the Day&#39;s,&#34; said Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1011">Cratchit, &#34;not for his. </span>
      <span id="f1012">Long life to him! </span>
      <span id="f1013">A merry Christmas and a happy new year! </span>
      <span id="f1014">He&#39;ll be very merry and very happy, I have no doubt!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1015">The children drank the toast after her. </span>
      <span id="f1016">It was the first of their proceedings which had no heartiness. </span>
      <span id="f1017">Tiny Tim drank it last of all, but he didn&#39;t care twopence for it. </span>
      <span id="f1018">Scrooge was the Ogre of the family. </span>
      <span id="f1019">The mention of his name cast a dark shadow on the party, which was not dispelled for full five minutes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1020">After it had passed away, they were ten times merrier than before, from the mere relief of Scrooge the Baleful being done with. </span>
      <span id="f1021">Bob Cratchit told them how he had a situation in his eye for Master Peter, which would bring in, if obtained, full five-and-sixpence weekly. </span>
      <span id="f1022">The two young Cratchits laughed tremendously at the idea of Peter&#39;s being a man of business; and Peter himself looked thoughtfully at the fire from between his collars, as if he were deliberating what particular investments he should favour when he came into the receipt of that bewildering income. </span>
      <span id="f1023">Martha, who was a poor apprentice at a milliner&#39;s, then told them what kind of work she had to do, and how many hours she worked at a stretch, and how she meant to lie abed to-morrow morning for a good long rest; to-morrow being a holiday she passed at home. </span>
      <span id="f1024">Also how she had seen a countess and a lord some days before, and how the lord &#34;was much about as tall as Peter;&#34; at which Peter pulled up his collars so high that you couldn&#39;t have seen his head if you had been there. </span>
      <span id="f1025">All this time the chestnuts and the jug went round and round; and by-and-bye they had a song, about a lost child travelling in the snow, from Tiny Tim, who had a plaintive little voice, and sang it very well indeed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1026">There was nothing of high mark in this. </span>
      <span id="f1027">They were not a handsome family; they were not well dressed; their shoes were far from being water-proof; their clothes were scanty; and Peter might have known, and very likely did, the inside of a pawnbroker&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f1028">But, they were happy, grateful, pleased with one another, and contented with the time; and when they faded, and looked happier yet in the bright sprinklings of the Spirit&#39;s torch at parting, Scrooge had his eye upon them, and especially on Tiny Tim, until the last.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1029">By this time it was getting dark, and snowing pretty heavily; and as Scrooge and the Spirit went along the streets, the brightness of the roaring fires in kitchens, parlours, and all sorts of rooms, was wonderful. </span>
      <span id="f1030">Here, the flickering of the blaze showed preparations for a cosy dinner, with hot plates baking through and through before the fire, and deep red curtains, ready to be drawn to shut out cold and darkness. </span>
      <span id="f1031">There all the children of the house were running out into the snow to meet their married sisters, brothers, cousins, uncles, aunts, and be the first to greet them. </span>
      <span id="f1032">Here, again, were shadows on the window-blind of guests assembling; and there a group of handsome girls, all hooded and fur-booted, and all chattering at once, tripped lightly off to some near neighbour&#39;s house; where, woe upon the single man who saw them enter--artful witches, well they knew it--in a glow!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1033">But, if you had judged from the numbers of people on their way to friendly gatherings, you might have thought that no one was at home to give them welcome when they got there, instead of every house expecting company, and piling up its fires half-chimney high. </span>
      <span id="f1034">Blessings on it, how the Ghost exulted! </span>
      <span id="f1035">How it bared its breadth of breast, and opened its capacious palm, and floated on, outpouring, with a generous hand, its bright and harmless mirth on everything within its reach! </span>
      <span id="f1036">The very lamplighter, who ran on before, dotting the dusky street with specks of light, and who was dressed to spend the evening somewhere, laughed out loudly as the Spirit passed, though little kenned the lamplighter that he had any company but Christmas!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1037">And now, without a word of warning from the Ghost, they stood upon a bleak and desert moor, where monstrous masses of rude stone were cast about, as though it were the burial-place of giants; and water spread itself wheresoever it listed, or would have done so, but for the frost that held it prisoner; and nothing grew but moss and furze, and coarse rank grass. </span>
      <span id="f1038">Down in the west the setting sun had left a streak of fiery red, which glared upon the desolation for an instant, like a sullen eye, and frowning lower, lower, lower yet, was lost in the thick gloom of darkest night.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1039">&#34;What place is this?&#34; asked Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1040">&#34;A place where Miners live, who labour in the bowels of the earth,&#34; returned the Spirit. </span>
      <span id="f1041">&#34;But they know me. </span>
      <span id="f1042">See!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1043">A light shone from the window of a hut, and swiftly they advanced towards it. </span>
      <span id="f1044">Passing through the wall of mud and stone, they found a cheerful company assembled round a glowing fire. </span>
      <span id="f1045">An old, old man and woman, with their children and their children&#39;s children, and another generation beyond that, all decked out gaily in their holiday attire. </span>
      <span id="f1046">The old man, in a voice that seldom rose above the howling of the wind upon the barren waste, was singing them a Christmas song--it had been a very old song when he was a boy--and from time to time they all joined in the chorus. </span>
      <span id="f1047">So surely as they raised their voices, the old man got quite blithe and loud; and so surely as they stopped, his vigour sank again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1048">The Spirit did not tarry here, but bade Scrooge hold his robe, and passing on above the moor, sped--whither? </span>
      <span id="f1049">Not to sea? </span>
      <span id="f1050">To sea. </span>
      <span id="f1051">To Scrooge&#39;s horror, looking back, he saw the last of the land, a frightful range of rocks, behind them; and his ears were deafened by the thundering of water, as it rolled and roared, and raged among the dreadful caverns it had worn, and fiercely tried to undermine the earth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1052">Built upon a dismal reef of sunken rocks, some league or so from shore, on which the waters chafed and dashed, the wild year through, there stood a solitary lighthouse. </span>
      <span id="f1053">Great heaps of sea-weed clung to its base, and storm-birds --born of the wind one might suppose, as sea-weed of the water--rose and fell about it, like the waves they skimmed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1054">But even here, two men who watched the light had made a fire, that through the loophole in the thick stone wall shed out a ray of brightness on the awful sea. </span>
      <span id="f1055">Joining their horny hands over the rough table at which they sat, they wished each other Merry Christmas in their can of grog; and one of them: the elder, too, with his face all damaged and scarred with hard weather, as the figure-head of an old ship might be: struck up a sturdy song that was like a Gale in itself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1056">Again the Ghost sped on, above the black and heaving sea --on, on--until, being far away, as he told Scrooge, from any shore, they lighted on a ship. </span>
      <span id="f1057">They stood beside the helmsman at the wheel, the look-out in the bow, the officers who had the watch; dark, ghostly figures in their several stations; but every man among them hummed a Christmas tune, or had a Christmas thought, or spoke below his breath to his companion of some bygone Christmas Day, with homeward hopes belonging to it. </span>
      <span id="f1058">And every man on board, waking or sleeping, good or bad, had had a kinder word for another on that day than on any day in the year; and had shared to some extent in its festivities; and had remembered those he cared for at a distance, and had known that they delighted to remember him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1059">It was a great surprise to Scrooge, while listening to the moaning of the wind, and thinking what a solemn thing it was to move on through the lonely darkness over an unknown abyss, whose depths were secrets as profound as Death: it was a great surprise to Scrooge, while thus engaged, to hear a hearty laugh. </span>
      <span id="f1060">It was a much greater surprise to Scrooge to recognise it as his own nephew&#39;s and to find himself in a bright, dry, gleaming room, with the Spirit standing smiling by his side, and looking at that same nephew with approving affability!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1061">&#34;Ha, ha!&#34; laughed Scrooge&#39;s nephew. </span>
      <span id="f1062">&#34;Ha, ha, ha!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1063">If you should happen, by any unlikely chance, to know a man more blest in a laugh than Scrooge&#39;s nephew, all I can say is, I should like to know him too. </span>
      <span id="f1064">Introduce him to me, and I&#39;ll cultivate his acquaintance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1065">It is a fair, even-handed, noble adjustment of things, that while there is infection in disease and sorrow, there is nothing in the world so irresistibly contagious as laughter and good-humour. </span>
      <span id="f1066">When Scrooge&#39;s nephew laughed in this way: holding his sides, rolling his head, and twisting his face into the most extravagant contortions: Scrooge&#39;s niece, by marriage, laughed as heartily as he. </span>
      <span id="f1067">And their assembled friends being not a bit behindhand, roared out lustily.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1068">&#34;Ha, ha! </span>
      <span id="f1069">Ha, ha, ha, ha!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1070">&#34;He said that Christmas was a humbug, as I live!&#34; cried Scrooge&#39;s nephew. </span>
      <span id="f1071">&#34;He believed it too!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1072">&#34;More shame for him, Fred!&#34; said Scrooge&#39;s niece, indignantly. </span>
      <span id="f1073">Bless those women; they never do anything by halves. </span>
      <span id="f1074">They are always in earnest.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1075">She was very pretty: exceedingly pretty. </span>
      <span id="f1076">With a dimpled, surprised-looking, capital face; a ripe little mouth, that seemed made to be kissed--as no doubt it was; all kinds of good little dots about her chin, that melted into one another when she laughed; and the sunniest pair of eyes you ever saw in any little creature&#39;s head. </span>
      <span id="f1077">Altogether she was what you would have called provoking, you know; but satisfactory, too. </span>
      <span id="f1078">Oh, perfectly satisfactory.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1079">&#34;He&#39;s a comical old fellow,&#34; said Scrooge&#39;s nephew, &#34;that&#39;s the truth: and not so pleasant as he might be. </span>
      <span id="f1080">However, his offences carry their own punishment, and I have nothing to say against him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1081">&#34;I&#39;m sure he is very rich, Fred,&#34; hinted Scrooge&#39;s niece. </span>
      <span id="f1082">&#34;At least you always tell me so.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1083">&#34;What of that, my dear!&#34; said Scrooge&#39;s nephew. </span>
      <span id="f1084">&#34;His wealth is of no use to him. </span>
      <span id="f1085">He don&#39;t do any good with it. </span>
      <span id="f1086">He don&#39;t make himself comfortable with it. </span>
      <span id="f1087">He hasn&#39;t the satisfaction of thinking--ha, ha, ha!--that he is ever going to benefit US with it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1088">&#34;I have no patience with him,&#34; observed Scrooge&#39;s niece. </span>
      <span id="f1089">Scrooge&#39;s niece&#39;s sisters, and all the other ladies, expressed the same opinion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1090">&#34;Oh, I have!&#34; said Scrooge&#39;s nephew. </span>
      <span id="f1091">&#34;I am sorry for him; I couldn&#39;t be angry with him if I tried. </span>
      <span id="f1092">Who suffers by his ill whims! </span>
      <span id="f1093">Himself, always. </span>
      <span id="f1094">Here, he takes it into his head to dislike us, and he won&#39;t come and dine with us. </span>
      <span id="f1095">What&#39;s the consequence? </span>
      <span id="f1096">He don&#39;t lose much of a dinner.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1097">&#34;Indeed, I think he loses a very good dinner,&#34; interrupted Scrooge&#39;s niece. </span>
      <span id="f1098">Everybody else said the same, and they must be allowed to have been competent judges, because they had just had dinner; and, with the dessert upon the table, were clustered round the fire, by lamplight.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1099">&#34;Well! </span>
      <span id="f1100">I&#39;m very glad to hear it,&#34; said Scrooge&#39;s nephew, &#34;because I haven&#39;t great faith in these young housekeepers. </span>
      <span id="f1101">What do you say, Topper?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1102">Topper had clearly got his eye upon one of Scrooge&#39;s niece&#39;s sisters, for he answered that a bachelor was a wretched outcast, who had no right to express an opinion on the subject. </span>
      <span id="f1103">Whereat Scrooge&#39;s niece&#39;s sister--the plump one with the lace tucker: not the one with the roses--blushed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1104">&#34;Do go on, Fred,&#34; said Scrooge&#39;s niece, clapping her hands. </span>
      <span id="f1105">&#34;He never finishes what he begins to say! </span>
      <span id="f1106">He is such a ridiculous fellow!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1107">Scrooge&#39;s nephew revelled in another laugh, and as it was impossible to keep the infection off; though the plump sister tried hard to do it with aromatic vinegar; his example was unanimously followed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1108">&#34;I was only going to say,&#34; said Scrooge&#39;s nephew, &#34;that the consequence of his taking a dislike to us, and not making merry with us, is, as I think, that he loses some pleasant moments, which could do him no harm. </span>
      <span id="f1109">I am sure he loses pleasanter companions than he can find in his own thoughts, either in his mouldy old office, or his dusty chambers. </span>
      <span id="f1110">I mean to give him the same chance every year, whether he likes it or not, for I pity him. </span>
      <span id="f1111">He may rail at Christmas till he dies, but he can&#39;t help thinking better of it--I defy him--if he finds me going there, in good temper, year after year, and saying Uncle Scrooge, how are you? </span>
      <span id="f1112">If it only puts him in the vein to leave his poor clerk fifty pounds, that&#39;s something; and I think I shook him yesterday.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1113">It was their turn to laugh now at the notion of his shaking Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1114">But being thoroughly good-natured, and not much caring what they laughed at, so that they laughed at any rate, he encouraged them in their merriment, and passed the bottle joyously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1115">After tea, they had some music. </span>
      <span id="f1116">For they were a musical family, and knew what they were about, when they sung a Glee or Catch, I can assure you: especially Topper, who could growl away in the bass like a good one, and never swell the large veins in his forehead, or get red in the face over it. </span>
      <span id="f1117">Scrooge&#39;s niece played well upon the harp; and played among other tunes a simple little air (a mere nothing: you might learn to whistle it in two minutes), which had been familiar to the child who fetched Scrooge from the boarding-school, as he had been reminded by the Ghost of Christmas Past. </span>
      <span id="f1118">When this strain of music sounded, all the things that Ghost had shown him, came upon his mind; he softened more and more; and thought that if he could have listened to it often, years ago, he might have cultivated the kindnesses of life for his own happiness with his own hands, without resorting to the sexton&#39;s spade that buried Jacob Marley.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1119">But they didn&#39;t devote the whole evening to music. </span>
      <span id="f1120">After a while they played at forfeits; for it is good to be children sometimes, and never better than at Christmas, when its mighty Founder was a child himself. </span>
      <span id="f1121">Stop! </span>
      <span id="f1122">There was first a game at blind-man&#39;s buff. </span>
      <span id="f1123">Of course there was. </span>
      <span id="f1124">And I no more believe Topper was really blind than I believe he had eyes in his boots. </span>
      <span id="f1125">My opinion is, that it was a done thing between him and Scrooge&#39;s nephew; and that the Ghost of Christmas Present knew it. </span>
      <span id="f1126">The way he went after that plump sister in the lace tucker, was an outrage on the credulity of human nature. </span>
      <span id="f1127">Knocking down the fire-irons, tumbling over the chairs, bumping against the piano, smothering himself among the curtains, wherever she went, there went he! </span>
      <span id="f1128">He always knew where the plump sister was. </span>
      <span id="f1129">He wouldn&#39;t catch anybody else. </span>
      <span id="f1130">If you had fallen up against him (as some of them did), on purpose, he would have made a feint of endeavouring to seize you, which would have been an affront to your understanding, and would instantly have sidled off in the direction of the plump sister. </span>
      <span id="f1131">She often cried out that it wasn&#39;t fair; and it really was not. </span>
      <span id="f1132">But when at last, he caught her; when, in spite of all her silken rustlings, and her rapid flutterings past him, he got her into a corner whence there was no escape; then his conduct was the most execrable. </span>
      <span id="f1133">For his pretending not to know her; his pretending that it was necessary to touch her head-dress, and further to assure himself of her identity by pressing a certain ring upon her finger, and a certain chain about her neck; was vile, monstrous! </span>
      <span id="f1134">No doubt she told him her opinion of it, when, another blind-man being in office, they were so very confidential together, behind the curtains.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1135">Scrooge&#39;s niece was not one of the blind-man&#39;s buff party, but was made comfortable with a large chair and a footstool, in a snug corner, where the Ghost and Scrooge were close behind her. </span>
      <span id="f1136">But she joined in the forfeits, and loved her love to admiration with all the letters of the alphabet. </span>
      <span id="f1137">Likewise at the game of How, When, and Where, she was very great, and to the secret joy of Scrooge&#39;s nephew, beat her sisters hollow: though they were sharp girls too, as Topper could have told you. </span>
      <span id="f1138">There might have been twenty people there, young and old, but they all played, and so did Scrooge; for wholly forgetting in the interest he had in what was going on, that his voice made no sound in their ears, he sometimes came out with his guess quite loud, and very often guessed quite right, too; for the sharpest needle, best Whitechapel, warranted not to cut in the eye, was not sharper than Scrooge; blunt as he took it in his head to be.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1139">The Ghost was greatly pleased to find him in this mood, and looked upon him with such favour, that he begged like a boy to be allowed to stay until the guests departed. </span>
      <span id="f1140">But this the Spirit said could not be done.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1141">&#34;Here is a new game,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1142">&#34;One half hour, Spirit, only one!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1143">It was a Game called Yes and No, where Scrooge&#39;s nephew had to think of something, and the rest must find out what; he only answering to their questions yes or no, as the case was. </span>
      <span id="f1144">The brisk fire of questioning to which he was exposed, elicited from him that he was thinking of an animal, a live animal, rather a disagreeable animal, a savage animal, an animal that growled and grunted sometimes, and talked sometimes, and lived in London, and walked about the streets, and wasn&#39;t made a show of, and wasn&#39;t led by anybody, and didn&#39;t live in a menagerie, and was never killed in a market, and was not a horse, or an ass, or a cow, or a bull, or a tiger, or a dog, or a pig, or a cat, or a bear. </span>
      <span id="f1145">At every fresh question that was put to him, this nephew burst into a fresh roar of laughter; and was so inexpressibly tickled, that he was obliged to get up off the sofa and stamp. </span>
      <span id="f1146">At last the plump sister, falling into a similar state, cried out:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1147">&#34;I have found it out! </span>
      <span id="f1148">I know what it is, Fred! </span>
      <span id="f1149">I know what it is!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1150">&#34;What is it?&#34; cried Fred.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1151">&#34;It&#39;s your Uncle Scro-o-o-o-oge!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1152">Which it certainly was. </span>
      <span id="f1153">Admiration was the universal sentiment, though some objected that the reply to &#34;Is it a bear?&#34; ought to have been &#34;Yes;&#34; inasmuch as an answer in the negative was sufficient to have diverted their thoughts from Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1154">Scrooge, supposing they had ever had any tendency that way.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1155">&#34;He has given us plenty of merriment, I am sure,&#34; said Fred, &#34;and it would be ungrateful not to drink his health. </span>
      <span id="f1156">Here is a glass of mulled wine ready to our hand at the moment; and I say, &#39;Uncle Scrooge!&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1157">&#34;Well! </span>
      <span id="f1158">Uncle Scrooge!&#34; they cried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1159">&#34;A Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year to the old man, whatever he is!&#34; said Scrooge&#39;s nephew. </span>
      <span id="f1160">&#34;He wouldn&#39;t take it from me, but may he have it, nevertheless. </span>
      <span id="f1161">Uncle Scrooge!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1162">Uncle Scrooge had imperceptibly become so gay and light of heart, that he would have pledged the unconscious company in return, and thanked them in an inaudible speech, if the Ghost had given him time. </span>
      <span id="f1163">But the whole scene passed off in the breath of the last word spoken by his nephew; and he and the Spirit were again upon their travels.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1164">Much they saw, and far they went, and many homes they visited, but always with a happy end. </span>
      <span id="f1165">The Spirit stood beside sick beds, and they were cheerful; on foreign lands, and they were close at home; by struggling men, and they were patient in their greater hope; by poverty, and it was rich. </span>
      <span id="f1166">In almshouse, hospital, and jail, in misery&#39;s every refuge, where vain man in his little brief authority had not made fast the door, and barred the Spirit out, he left his blessing, and taught Scrooge his precepts.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1167">It was a long night, if it were only a night; but Scrooge had his doubts of this, because the Christmas Holidays appeared to be condensed into the space of time they passed together. </span>
      <span id="f1168">It was strange, too, that while Scrooge remained unaltered in his outward form, the Ghost grew older, clearly older. </span>
      <span id="f1169">Scrooge had observed this change, but never spoke of it, until they left a children&#39;s Twelfth Night party, when, looking at the Spirit as they stood together in an open place, he noticed that its hair was grey.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1170">&#34;Are spirits&#39; lives so short?&#34; asked Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1171">&#34;My life upon this globe, is very brief,&#34; replied the Ghost. </span>
      <span id="f1172">&#34;It ends to-night.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1173">&#34;To-night!&#34; cried Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1174">&#34;To-night at midnight. </span>
      <span id="f1175">Hark! </span>
      <span id="f1176">The time is drawing near.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1177">The chimes were ringing the three quarters past eleven at that moment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1178">&#34;Forgive me if I am not justified in what I ask,&#34; said Scrooge, looking intently at the Spirit&#39;s robe, &#34;but I see something strange, and not belonging to yourself, protruding from your skirts. </span>
      <span id="f1179">Is it a foot or a claw?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1180">&#34;It might be a claw, for the flesh there is upon it,&#34; was the Spirit&#39;s sorrowful reply. </span>
      <span id="f1181">&#34;Look here.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1182">From the foldings of its robe, it brought two children; wretched, abject, frightful, hideous, miserable. </span>
      <span id="f1183">They knelt down at its feet, and clung upon the outside of its garment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1184">&#34;Oh, Man! </span>
      <span id="f1185">look here. </span>
      <span id="f1186">Look, look, down here!&#34; exclaimed the Ghost.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1187">They were a boy and girl. </span>
      <span id="f1188">Yellow, meagre, ragged, scowling, wolfish; but prostrate, too, in their humility. </span>
      <span id="f1189">Where graceful youth should have filled their features out, and touched them with its freshest tints, a stale and shrivelled hand, like that of age, had pinched, and twisted them, and pulled them into shreds. </span>
      <span id="f1190">Where angels might have sat enthroned, devils lurked, and glared out menacing. </span>
      <span id="f1191">No change, no degradation, no perversion of humanity, in any grade, through all the mysteries of wonderful creation, has monsters half so horrible and dread.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1192">Scrooge started back, appalled. </span>
      <span id="f1193">Having them shown to him in this way, he tried to say they were fine children, but the words choked themselves, rather than be parties to a lie of such enormous magnitude.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1194">&#34;Spirit! </span>
      <span id="f1195">are they yours?&#34; Scrooge could say no more.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1196">&#34;They are Man&#39;s,&#34; said the Spirit, looking down upon them. </span>
      <span id="f1197">&#34;And they cling to me, appealing from their fathers. </span>
      <span id="f1198">This boy is Ignorance. </span>
      <span id="f1199">This girl is Want. </span>
      <span id="f1200">Beware them both, and all of their degree, but most of all beware this boy, for on his brow I see that written which is Doom, unless the writing be erased. </span>
      <span id="f1201">Deny it!&#34; cried the Spirit, stretching out its hand towards the city. </span>
      <span id="f1202">&#34;Slander those who tell it ye! </span>
      <span id="f1203">Admit it for your factious purposes, and make it worse. </span>
      <span id="f1204">And bide the end!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1205">&#34;Have they no refuge or resource?&#34; cried Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1206">&#34;Are there no prisons?&#34; said the Spirit, turning on him for the last time with his own words. </span>
      <span id="f1207">&#34;Are there no workhouses?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1208">The bell struck twelve.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1209">Scrooge looked about him for the Ghost, and saw it not. </span>
      <span id="f1210">As the last stroke ceased to vibrate, he remembered the prediction of old Jacob Marley, and lifting up his eyes, beheld a solemn Phantom, draped and hooded, coming, like a mist along the ground, towards him.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>