<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>STAVE IV:  THE LAST OF THE SPIRITS</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1211">STAVE IV:  THE LAST OF THE SPIRITS</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1212">THE Phantom slowly, gravely, silently, approached. </span>
      <span id="f1213">When it came near him, Scrooge bent down upon his knee; for in the very air through which this Spirit moved it seemed to scatter gloom and mystery.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1214">It was shrouded in a deep black garment, which concealed its head, its face, its form, and left nothing of it visible save one outstretched hand. </span>
      <span id="f1215">But for this it would have been difficult to detach its figure from the night, and separate it from the darkness by which it was surrounded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1216">He felt that it was tall and stately when it came beside him, and that its mysterious presence filled him with a solemn dread. </span>
      <span id="f1217">He knew no more, for the Spirit neither spoke nor moved.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1218">&#34;I am in the presence of the Ghost of Christmas Yet To Come?&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1219">The Spirit answered not, but pointed onward with its hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1220">&#34;You are about to show me shadows of the things that have not happened, but will happen in the time before us,&#34; Scrooge pursued. </span>
      <span id="f1221">&#34;Is that so, Spirit?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1222">The upper portion of the garment was contracted for an instant in its folds, as if the Spirit had inclined its head. </span>
      <span id="f1223">That was the only answer he received.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1224">Although well used to ghostly company by this time, Scrooge feared the silent shape so much that his legs trembled beneath him, and he found that he could hardly stand when he prepared to follow it. </span>
      <span id="f1225">The Spirit paused a moment, as observing his condition, and giving him time to recover.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1226">But Scrooge was all the worse for this. </span>
      <span id="f1227">It thrilled him with a vague uncertain horror, to know that behind the dusky shroud, there were ghostly eyes intently fixed upon him, while he, though he stretched his own to the utmost, could see nothing but a spectral hand and one great heap of black.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1228">&#34;Ghost of the Future!&#34; he exclaimed, &#34;I fear you more than any spectre I have seen. </span>
      <span id="f1229">But as I know your purpose is to do me good, and as I hope to live to be another man from what I was, I am prepared to bear you company, and do it with a thankful heart. </span>
      <span id="f1230">Will you not speak to me?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1231">It gave him no reply. </span>
      <span id="f1232">The hand was pointed straight before them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1233">&#34;Lead on!&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1234">&#34;Lead on! </span>
      <span id="f1235">The night is waning fast, and it is precious time to me, I know. </span>
      <span id="f1236">Lead on, Spirit!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1237">The Phantom moved away as it had come towards him. </span>
      <span id="f1238">Scrooge followed in the shadow of its dress, which bore him up, he thought, and carried him along.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1239">They scarcely seemed to enter the city; for the city rather seemed to spring up about them, and encompass them of its own act. </span>
      <span id="f1240">But there they were, in the heart of it; on &#39;Change, amongst the merchants; who hurried up and down, and chinked the money in their pockets, and conversed in groups, and looked at their watches, and trifled thoughtfully with their great gold seals; and so forth, as Scrooge had seen them often.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1241">The Spirit stopped beside one little knot of business men. </span>
      <span id="f1242">Observing that the hand was pointed to them, Scrooge advanced to listen to their talk.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1243">&#34;No,&#34; said a great fat man with a monstrous chin, &#34;I don&#39;t know much about it, either way. </span>
      <span id="f1244">I only know he&#39;s dead.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1245">&#34;When did he die?&#34; inquired another.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1246">&#34;Last night, I believe.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1247">&#34;Why, what was the matter with him?&#34; asked a third, taking a vast quantity of snuff out of a very large snuff-box. </span>
      <span id="f1248">&#34;I thought he&#39;d never die.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1249">&#34;God knows,&#34; said the first, with a yawn.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1250">&#34;What has he done with his money?&#34; asked a red-faced gentleman with a pendulous excrescence on the end of his nose, that shook like the gills of a turkey-cock.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1251">&#34;I haven&#39;t heard,&#34; said the man with the large chin, yawning again. </span>
      <span id="f1252">&#34;Left it to his company, perhaps. </span>
      <span id="f1253">He hasn&#39;t left it to me. </span>
      <span id="f1254">That&#39;s all I know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1255">This pleasantry was received with a general laugh.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1256">&#34;It&#39;s likely to be a very cheap funeral,&#34; said the same speaker; &#34;for upon my life I don&#39;t know of anybody to go to it. </span>
      <span id="f1257">Suppose we make up a party and volunteer?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1258">&#34;I don&#39;t mind going if a lunch is provided,&#34; observed the gentleman with the excrescence on his nose. </span>
      <span id="f1259">&#34;But I must be fed, if I make one.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1260">Another laugh.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1261">&#34;Well, I am the most disinterested among you, after all,&#34; said the first speaker, &#34;for I never wear black gloves, and I never eat lunch. </span>
      <span id="f1262">But I&#39;ll offer to go, if anybody else will. </span>
      <span id="f1263">When I come to think of it, I&#39;m not at all sure that I wasn&#39;t his most particular friend; for we used to stop and speak whenever we met. </span>
      <span id="f1264">Bye, bye!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1265">Speakers and listeners strolled away, and mixed with other groups. </span>
      <span id="f1266">Scrooge knew the men, and looked towards the Spirit for an explanation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1267">The Phantom glided on into a street. </span>
      <span id="f1268">Its finger pointed to two persons meeting. </span>
      <span id="f1269">Scrooge listened again, thinking that the explanation might lie here.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1270">He knew these men, also, perfectly. </span>
      <span id="f1271">They were men of business: very wealthy, and of great importance. </span>
      <span id="f1272">He had made a point always of standing well in their esteem: in a business point of view, that is; strictly in a business point of view.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1273">&#34;How are you?&#34; said one.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1274">&#34;How are you?&#34; returned the other.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1275">&#34;Well!&#34; said the first. </span>
      <span id="f1276">&#34;Old Scratch has got his own at last, hey?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1277">&#34;So I am told,&#34; returned the second. </span>
      <span id="f1278">&#34;Cold, isn&#39;t it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1279">&#34;Seasonable for Christmas time. </span>
      <span id="f1280">You&#39;re not a skater, I suppose?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1281">&#34;No. </span>
      <span id="f1282">No. </span>
      <span id="f1283">Something else to think of. </span>
      <span id="f1284">Good morning!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1285">Not another word. </span>
      <span id="f1286">That was their meeting, their conversation, and their parting.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1287">Scrooge was at first inclined to be surprised that the Spirit should attach importance to conversations apparently so trivial; but feeling assured that they must have some hidden purpose, he set himself to consider what it was likely to be. </span>
      <span id="f1288">They could scarcely be supposed to have any bearing on the death of Jacob, his old partner, for that was Past, and this Ghost&#39;s province was the Future. </span>
      <span id="f1289">Nor could he think of any one immediately connected with himself, to whom he could apply them. </span>
      <span id="f1290">But nothing doubting that to whomsoever they applied they had some latent moral for his own improvement, he resolved to treasure up every word he heard, and everything he saw; and especially to observe the shadow of himself when it appeared. </span>
      <span id="f1291">For he had an expectation that the conduct of his future self would give him the clue he missed, and would render the solution of these riddles easy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1292">He looked about in that very place for his own image; but another man stood in his accustomed corner, and though the clock pointed to his usual time of day for being there, he saw no likeness of himself among the multitudes that poured in through the Porch. </span>
      <span id="f1293">It gave him little surprise, however; for he had been revolving in his mind a change of life, and thought and hoped he saw his new-born resolutions carried out in this.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1294">Quiet and dark, beside him stood the Phantom, with its outstretched hand. </span>
      <span id="f1295">When he roused himself from his thoughtful quest, he fancied from the turn of the hand, and its situation in reference to himself, that the Unseen Eyes were looking at him keenly. </span>
      <span id="f1296">It made him shudder, and feel very cold.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1297">They left the busy scene, and went into an obscure part of the town, where Scrooge had never penetrated before, although he recognised its situation, and its bad repute. </span>
      <span id="f1298">The ways were foul and narrow; the shops and houses wretched; the people half-naked, drunken, slipshod, ugly. </span>
      <span id="f1299">Alleys and archways, like so many cesspools, disgorged their offences of smell, and dirt, and life, upon the straggling streets; and the whole quarter reeked with crime, with filth, and misery.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1300">Far in this den of infamous resort, there was a low-browed, beetling shop, below a pent-house roof, where iron, old rags, bottles, bones, and greasy offal, were bought. </span>
      <span id="f1301">Upon the floor within, were piled up heaps of rusty keys, nails, chains, hinges, files, scales, weights, and refuse iron of all kinds. </span>
      <span id="f1302">Secrets that few would like to scrutinise were bred and hidden in mountains of unseemly rags, masses of corrupted fat, and sepulchres of bones. </span>
      <span id="f1303">Sitting in among the wares he dealt in, by a charcoal stove, made of old bricks, was a grey-haired rascal, nearly seventy years of age; who had screened himself from the cold air without, by a frousy curtaining of miscellaneous tatters, hung upon a line; and smoked his pipe in all the luxury of calm retirement.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1304">Scrooge and the Phantom came into the presence of this man, just as a woman with a heavy bundle slunk into the shop. </span>
      <span id="f1305">But she had scarcely entered, when another woman, similarly laden, came in too; and she was closely followed by a man in faded black, who was no less startled by the sight of them, than they had been upon the recognition of each other. </span>
      <span id="f1306">After a short period of blank astonishment, in which the old man with the pipe had joined them, they all three burst into a laugh.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1307">&#34;Let the charwoman alone to be the first!&#34; cried she who had entered first. </span>
      <span id="f1308">&#34;Let the laundress alone to be the second; and let the undertaker&#39;s man alone to be the third. </span>
      <span id="f1309">Look here, old Joe, here&#39;s a chance! </span>
      <span id="f1310">If we haven&#39;t all three met here without meaning it!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1311">&#34;You couldn&#39;t have met in a better place,&#34; said old Joe, removing his pipe from his mouth. </span>
      <span id="f1312">&#34;Come into the parlour. </span>
      <span id="f1313">You were made free of it long ago, you know; and the other two an&#39;t strangers. </span>
      <span id="f1314">Stop till I shut the door of the shop. </span>
      <span id="f1315">Ah! </span>
      <span id="f1316">How it skreeks! </span>
      <span id="f1317">There an&#39;t such a rusty bit of metal in the place as its own hinges, I believe; and I&#39;m sure there&#39;s no such old bones here, as mine. </span>
      <span id="f1318">Ha, ha! </span>
      <span id="f1319">We&#39;re all suitable to our calling, we&#39;re well matched. </span>
      <span id="f1320">Come into the parlour. </span>
      <span id="f1321">Come into the parlour.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1322">The parlour was the space behind the screen of rags. </span>
      <span id="f1323">The old man raked the fire together with an old stair-rod, and having trimmed his smoky lamp (for it was night), with the stem of his pipe, put it in his mouth again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1324">While he did this, the woman who had already spoken threw her bundle on the floor, and sat down in a flaunting manner on a stool; crossing her elbows on her knees, and looking with a bold defiance at the other two.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1325">&#34;What odds then! </span>
      <span id="f1326">What odds, Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1327">Dilber?&#34; said the woman. </span>
      <span id="f1328">&#34;Every person has a right to take care of themselves. </span>
      <span id="f1329">He always did.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1330">&#34;That&#39;s true, indeed!&#34; said the laundress. </span>
      <span id="f1331">&#34;No man more so.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1332">&#34;Why then, don&#39;t stand staring as if you was afraid, woman; who&#39;s the wiser? </span>
      <span id="f1333">We&#39;re not going to pick holes in each other&#39;s coats, I suppose?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1334">&#34;No, indeed!&#34; said Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1335">Dilber and the man together. </span>
      <span id="f1336">&#34;We should hope not.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1337">&#34;Very well, then!&#34; cried the woman. </span>
      <span id="f1338">&#34;That&#39;s enough. </span>
      <span id="f1339">Who&#39;s the worse for the loss of a few things like these? </span>
      <span id="f1340">Not a dead man, I suppose.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1341">&#34;No, indeed,&#34; said Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1342">Dilber, laughing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1343">&#34;If he wanted to keep &#39;em after he was dead, a wicked old screw,&#34; pursued the woman, &#34;why wasn&#39;t he natural in his lifetime? </span>
      <span id="f1344">If he had been, he&#39;d have had somebody to look after him when he was struck with Death, instead of lying gasping out his last there, alone by himself.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1345">&#34;It&#39;s the truest word that ever was spoke,&#34; said Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1346">Dilber. </span>
      <span id="f1347">&#34;It&#39;s a judgment on him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1348">&#34;I wish it was a little heavier judgment,&#34; replied the woman; &#34;and it should have been, you may depend upon it, if I could have laid my hands on anything else. </span>
      <span id="f1349">Open that bundle, old Joe, and let me know the value of it. </span>
      <span id="f1350">Speak out plain. </span>
      <span id="f1351">I&#39;m not afraid to be the first, nor afraid for them to see it. </span>
      <span id="f1352">We know pretty well that we were helping ourselves, before we met here, I believe. </span>
      <span id="f1353">It&#39;s no sin. </span>
      <span id="f1354">Open the bundle, Joe.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1355">But the gallantry of her friends would not allow of this; and the man in faded black, mounting the breach first, produced his plunder. </span>
      <span id="f1356">It was not extensive. </span>
      <span id="f1357">A seal or two, a pencil-case, a pair of sleeve-buttons, and a brooch of no great value, were all. </span>
      <span id="f1358">They were severally examined and appraised by old Joe, who chalked the sums he was disposed to give for each, upon the wall, and added them up into a total when he found there was nothing more to come.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1359">&#34;That&#39;s your account,&#34; said Joe, &#34;and I wouldn&#39;t give another sixpence, if I was to be boiled for not doing it. </span>
      <span id="f1360">Who&#39;s next?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1361">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1362">Dilber was next. </span>
      <span id="f1363">Sheets and towels, a little wearing apparel, two old-fashioned silver teaspoons, a pair of sugar-tongs, and a few boots. </span>
      <span id="f1364">Her account was stated on the wall in the same manner.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1365">&#34;I always give too much to ladies. </span>
      <span id="f1366">It&#39;s a weakness of mine, and that&#39;s the way I ruin myself,&#34; said old Joe. </span>
      <span id="f1367">&#34;That&#39;s your account. </span>
      <span id="f1368">If you asked me for another penny, and made it an open question, I&#39;d repent of being so liberal and knock off half-a-crown.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1369">&#34;And now undo my bundle, Joe,&#34; said the first woman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1370">Joe went down on his knees for the greater convenience of opening it, and having unfastened a great many knots, dragged out a large and heavy roll of some dark stuff.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1371">&#34;What do you call this?&#34; said Joe. </span>
      <span id="f1372">&#34;Bed-curtains!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1373">&#34;Ah!&#34; returned the woman, laughing and leaning forward on her crossed arms. </span>
      <span id="f1374">&#34;Bed-curtains!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1375">&#34;You don&#39;t mean to say you took &#39;em down, rings and all, with him lying there?&#34; said Joe.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1376">&#34;Yes I do,&#34; replied the woman. </span>
      <span id="f1377">&#34;Why not?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1378">&#34;You were born to make your fortune,&#34; said Joe, &#34;and you&#39;ll certainly do it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1379">&#34;I certainly shan&#39;t hold my hand, when I can get anything in it by reaching it out, for the sake of such a man as He was, I promise you, Joe,&#34; returned the woman coolly. </span>
      <span id="f1380">&#34;Don&#39;t drop that oil upon the blankets, now.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1381">&#34;His blankets?&#34; asked Joe.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1382">&#34;Whose else&#39;s do you think?&#34; replied the woman. </span>
      <span id="f1383">&#34;He isn&#39;t likely to take cold without &#39;em, I dare say.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1384">&#34;I hope he didn&#39;t die of anything catching? </span>
      <span id="f1385">Eh?&#34; said old Joe, stopping in his work, and looking up.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1386">&#34;Don&#39;t you be afraid of that,&#34; returned the woman. </span>
      <span id="f1387">&#34;I an&#39;t so fond of his company that I&#39;d loiter about him for such things, if he did. </span>
      <span id="f1388">Ah! </span>
      <span id="f1389">you may look through that shirt till your eyes ache; but you won&#39;t find a hole in it, nor a threadbare place. </span>
      <span id="f1390">It&#39;s the best he had, and a fine one too. </span>
      <span id="f1391">They&#39;d have wasted it, if it hadn&#39;t been for me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1392">&#34;What do you call wasting of it?&#34; asked old Joe.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1393">&#34;Putting it on him to be buried in, to be sure,&#34; replied the woman with a laugh. </span>
      <span id="f1394">&#34;Somebody was fool enough to do it, but I took it off again. </span>
      <span id="f1395">If calico an&#39;t good enough for such a purpose, it isn&#39;t good enough for anything. </span>
      <span id="f1396">It&#39;s quite as becoming to the body. </span>
      <span id="f1397">He can&#39;t look uglier than he did in that one.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1398">Scrooge listened to this dialogue in horror. </span>
      <span id="f1399">As they sat grouped about their spoil, in the scanty light afforded by the old man&#39;s lamp, he viewed them with a detestation and disgust, which could hardly have been greater, though they had been obscene demons, marketing the corpse itself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1400">&#34;Ha, ha!&#34; laughed the same woman, when old Joe, producing a flannel bag with money in it, told out their several gains upon the ground. </span>
      <span id="f1401">&#34;This is the end of it, you see! </span>
      <span id="f1402">He frightened every one away from him when he was alive, to profit us when he was dead! </span>
      <span id="f1403">Ha, ha, ha!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1404">&#34;Spirit!&#34; said Scrooge, shuddering from head to foot. </span>
      <span id="f1405">&#34;I see, I see. </span>
      <span id="f1406">The case of this unhappy man might be my own. </span>
      <span id="f1407">My life tends that way, now. </span>
      <span id="f1408">Merciful Heaven, what is this!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1409">He recoiled in terror, for the scene had changed, and now he almost touched a bed: a bare, uncurtained bed: on which, beneath a ragged sheet, there lay a something covered up, which, though it was dumb, announced itself in awful language.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1410">The room was very dark, too dark to be observed with any accuracy, though Scrooge glanced round it in obedience to a secret impulse, anxious to know what kind of room it was. </span>
      <span id="f1411">A pale light, rising in the outer air, fell straight upon the bed; and on it, plundered and bereft, unwatched, unwept, uncared for, was the body of this man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1412">Scrooge glanced towards the Phantom. </span>
      <span id="f1413">Its steady hand was pointed to the head. </span>
      <span id="f1414">The cover was so carelessly adjusted that the slightest raising of it, the motion of a finger upon Scrooge&#39;s part, would have disclosed the face. </span>
      <span id="f1415">He thought of it, felt how easy it would be to do, and longed to do it; but had no more power to withdraw the veil than to dismiss the spectre at his side.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1416">Oh cold, cold, rigid, dreadful Death, set up thine altar here, and dress it with such terrors as thou hast at thy command: for this is thy dominion! </span>
      <span id="f1417">But of the loved, revered, and honoured head, thou canst not turn one hair to thy dread purposes, or make one feature odious. </span>
      <span id="f1418">It is not that the hand is heavy and will fall down when released; it is not that the heart and pulse are still; but that the hand WAS open, generous, and true; the heart brave, warm, and tender; and the pulse a man&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f1419">Strike, Shadow, strike! </span>
      <span id="f1420">And see his good deeds springing from the wound, to sow the world with life immortal!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1421">No voice pronounced these words in Scrooge&#39;s ears, and yet he heard them when he looked upon the bed. </span>
      <span id="f1422">He thought, if this man could be raised up now, what would be his foremost thoughts? </span>
      <span id="f1423">Avarice, hard-dealing, griping cares? </span>
      <span id="f1424">They have brought him to a rich end, truly!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1425">He lay, in the dark empty house, with not a man, a woman, or a child, to say that he was kind to me in this or that, and for the memory of one kind word I will be kind to him. </span>
      <span id="f1426">A cat was tearing at the door, and there was a sound of gnawing rats beneath the hearth-stone. </span>
      <span id="f1427">What they wanted in the room of death, and why they were so restless and disturbed, Scrooge did not dare to think.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1428">&#34;Spirit!&#34; he said, &#34;this is a fearful place. </span>
      <span id="f1429">In leaving it, I shall not leave its lesson, trust me. </span>
      <span id="f1430">Let us go!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1431">Still the Ghost pointed with an unmoved finger to the head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1432">&#34;I understand you,&#34; Scrooge returned, &#34;and I would do it, if I could. </span>
      <span id="f1433">But I have not the power, Spirit. </span>
      <span id="f1434">I have not the power.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1435">Again it seemed to look upon him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1436">&#34;If there is any person in the town, who feels emotion caused by this man&#39;s death,&#34; said Scrooge quite agonised, &#34;show that person to me, Spirit, I beseech you!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1437">The Phantom spread its dark robe before him for a moment, like a wing; and withdrawing it, revealed a room by daylight, where a mother and her children were.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1438">She was expecting some one, and with anxious eagerness; for she walked up and down the room; started at every sound; looked out from the window; glanced at the clock; tried, but in vain, to work with her needle; and could hardly bear the voices of the children in their play.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1439">At length the long-expected knock was heard. </span>
      <span id="f1440">She hurried to the door, and met her husband; a man whose face was careworn and depressed, though he was young. </span>
      <span id="f1441">There was a remarkable expression in it now; a kind of serious delight of which he felt ashamed, and which he struggled to repress.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1442">He sat down to the dinner that had been hoarding for him by the fire; and when she asked him faintly what news (which was not until after a long silence), he appeared embarrassed how to answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1443">&#34;Is it good?&#34; she said, &#34;or bad?&#34;--to help him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1444">&#34;Bad,&#34; he answered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1445">&#34;We are quite ruined?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1446">&#34;No. </span>
      <span id="f1447">There is hope yet, Caroline.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1448">&#34;If he relents,&#34; she said, amazed, &#34;there is! </span>
      <span id="f1449">Nothing is past hope, if such a miracle has happened.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1450">&#34;He is past relenting,&#34; said her husband. </span>
      <span id="f1451">&#34;He is dead.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1452">She was a mild and patient creature if her face spoke truth; but she was thankful in her soul to hear it, and she said so, with clasped hands. </span>
      <span id="f1453">She prayed forgiveness the next moment, and was sorry; but the first was the emotion of her heart.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1454">&#34;What the half-drunken woman whom I told you of last night, said to me, when I tried to see him and obtain a week&#39;s delay; and what I thought was a mere excuse to avoid me; turns out to have been quite true. </span>
      <span id="f1455">He was not only very ill, but dying, then.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1456">&#34;To whom will our debt be transferred?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1457">&#34;I don&#39;t know. </span>
      <span id="f1458">But before that time we shall be ready with the money; and even though we were not, it would be a bad fortune indeed to find so merciless a creditor in his successor. </span>
      <span id="f1459">We may sleep to-night with light hearts, Caroline!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1460">Yes. </span>
      <span id="f1461">Soften it as they would, their hearts were lighter. </span>
      <span id="f1462">The children&#39;s faces, hushed and clustered round to hear what they so little understood, were brighter; and it was a happier house for this man&#39;s death! </span>
      <span id="f1463">The only emotion that the Ghost could show him, caused by the event, was one of pleasure.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1464">&#34;Let me see some tenderness connected with a death,&#34; said Scrooge; &#34;or that dark chamber, Spirit, which we left just now, will be for ever present to me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1465">The Ghost conducted him through several streets familiar to his feet; and as they went along, Scrooge looked here and there to find himself, but nowhere was he to be seen. </span>
      <span id="f1466">They entered poor Bob Cratchit&#39;s house; the dwelling he had visited before; and found the mother and the children seated round the fire.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1467">Quiet. </span>
      <span id="f1468">Very quiet. </span>
      <span id="f1469">The noisy little Cratchits were as still as statues in one corner, and sat looking up at Peter, who had a book before him. </span>
      <span id="f1470">The mother and her daughters were engaged in sewing. </span>
      <span id="f1471">But surely they were very quiet!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1472">&#34;&#39;And He took a child, and set him in the midst of them.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1473">Where had Scrooge heard those words? </span>
      <span id="f1474">He had not dreamed them. </span>
      <span id="f1475">The boy must have read them out, as he and the Spirit crossed the threshold. </span>
      <span id="f1476">Why did he not go on?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1477">The mother laid her work upon the table, and put her hand up to her face.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1478">&#34;The colour hurts my eyes,&#34; she said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1479">The colour? </span>
      <span id="f1480">Ah, poor Tiny Tim!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1481">&#34;They&#39;re better now again,&#34; said Cratchit&#39;s wife. </span>
      <span id="f1482">&#34;It makes them weak by candle-light; and I wouldn&#39;t show weak eyes to your father when he comes home, for the world. </span>
      <span id="f1483">It must be near his time.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1484">&#34;Past it rather,&#34; Peter answered, shutting up his book. </span>
      <span id="f1485">&#34;But I think he has walked a little slower than he used, these few last evenings, mother.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1486">They were very quiet again. </span>
      <span id="f1487">At last she said, and in a steady, cheerful voice, that only faltered once:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1488">&#34;I have known him walk with--I have known him walk with Tiny Tim upon his shoulder, very fast indeed.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1489">&#34;And so have I,&#34; cried Peter. </span>
      <span id="f1490">&#34;Often.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1491">&#34;And so have I,&#34; exclaimed another. </span>
      <span id="f1492">So had all.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1493">&#34;But he was very light to carry,&#34; she resumed, intent upon her work, &#34;and his father loved him so, that it was no trouble: no trouble. </span>
      <span id="f1494">And there is your father at the door!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1495">She hurried out to meet him; and little Bob in his comforter --he had need of it, poor fellow--came in. </span>
      <span id="f1496">His tea was ready for him on the hob, and they all tried who should help him to it most. </span>
      <span id="f1497">Then the two young Cratchits got upon his knees and laid, each child a little cheek, against his face, as if they said, &#34;Don&#39;t mind it, father. </span>
      <span id="f1498">Don&#39;t be grieved!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1499">Bob was very cheerful with them, and spoke pleasantly to all the family. </span>
      <span id="f1500">He looked at the work upon the table, and praised the industry and speed of Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1501">Cratchit and the girls. </span>
      <span id="f1502">They would be done long before Sunday, he said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1503">&#34;Sunday! </span>
      <span id="f1504">You went to-day, then, Robert?&#34; said his wife.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1505">&#34;Yes, my dear,&#34; returned Bob. </span>
      <span id="f1506">&#34;I wish you could have gone. </span>
      <span id="f1507">It would have done you good to see how green a place it is. </span>
      <span id="f1508">But you&#39;ll see it often. </span>
      <span id="f1509">I promised him that I would walk there on a Sunday. </span>
      <span id="f1510">My little, little child!&#34; cried Bob. </span>
      <span id="f1511">&#34;My little child!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1512">He broke down all at once. </span>
      <span id="f1513">He couldn&#39;t help it. </span>
      <span id="f1514">If he could have helped it, he and his child would have been farther apart perhaps than they were.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1515">He left the room, and went up-stairs into the room above, which was lighted cheerfully, and hung with Christmas. </span>
      <span id="f1516">There was a chair set close beside the child, and there were signs of some one having been there, lately. </span>
      <span id="f1517">Poor Bob sat down in it, and when he had thought a little and composed himself, he kissed the little face. </span>
      <span id="f1518">He was reconciled to what had happened, and went down again quite happy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1519">They drew about the fire, and talked; the girls and mother working still. </span>
      <span id="f1520">Bob told them of the extraordinary kindness of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1521">Scrooge&#39;s nephew, whom he had scarcely seen but once, and who, meeting him in the street that day, and seeing that he looked a little--&#34;just a little down you know,&#34; said Bob, inquired what had happened to distress him. </span>
      <span id="f1522">&#34;On which,&#34; said Bob, &#34;for he is the pleasantest-spoken gentleman you ever heard, I told him. </span>
      <span id="f1523">&#39;I am heartily sorry for it, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1524">Cratchit,&#39; he said, &#39;and heartily sorry for your good wife.&#39; By the bye, how he ever knew that, I don&#39;t know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1525">&#34;Knew what, my dear?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1526">&#34;Why, that you were a good wife,&#34; replied Bob.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1527">&#34;Everybody knows that!&#34; said Peter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1528">&#34;Very well observed, my boy!&#34; cried Bob. </span>
      <span id="f1529">&#34;I hope they do. </span>
      <span id="f1530">&#39;Heartily sorry,&#39; he said, &#39;for your good wife. </span>
      <span id="f1531">If I can be of service to you in any way,&#39; he said, giving me his card, &#39;that&#39;s where I live. </span>
      <span id="f1532">Pray come to me.&#39; Now, it wasn&#39;t,&#34; cried Bob, &#34;for the sake of anything he might be able to do for us, so much as for his kind way, that this was quite delightful. </span>
      <span id="f1533">It really seemed as if he had known our Tiny Tim, and felt with us.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1534">&#34;I&#39;m sure he&#39;s a good soul!&#34; said Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1535">Cratchit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1536">&#34;You would be surer of it, my dear,&#34; returned Bob, &#34;if you saw and spoke to him. </span>
      <span id="f1537">I shouldn&#39;t be at all surprised-- mark what I say!--if he got Peter a better situation.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1538">&#34;Only hear that, Peter,&#34; said Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1539">Cratchit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1540">&#34;And then,&#34; cried one of the girls, &#34;Peter will be keeping company with some one, and setting up for himself.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1541">&#34;Get along with you!&#34; retorted Peter, grinning.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1542">&#34;It&#39;s just as likely as not,&#34; said Bob, &#34;one of these days; though there&#39;s plenty of time for that, my dear. </span>
      <span id="f1543">But however and whenever we part from one another, I am sure we shall none of us forget poor Tiny Tim--shall we--or this first parting that there was among us?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1544">&#34;Never, father!&#34; cried they all.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1545">&#34;And I know,&#34; said Bob, &#34;I know, my dears, that when we recollect how patient and how mild he was; although he was a little, little child; we shall not quarrel easily among ourselves, and forget poor Tiny Tim in doing it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1546">&#34;No, never, father!&#34; they all cried again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1547">&#34;I am very happy,&#34; said little Bob, &#34;I am very happy!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1548">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1549">Cratchit kissed him, his daughters kissed him, the two young Cratchits kissed him, and Peter and himself shook hands. </span>
      <span id="f1550">Spirit of Tiny Tim, thy childish essence was from God!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1551">&#34;Spectre,&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;something informs me that our parting moment is at hand. </span>
      <span id="f1552">I know it, but I know not how. </span>
      <span id="f1553">Tell me what man that was whom we saw lying dead?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1554">The Ghost of Christmas Yet To Come conveyed him, as before--though at a different time, he thought: indeed, there seemed no order in these latter visions, save that they were in the Future--into the resorts of business men, but showed him not himself. </span>
      <span id="f1555">Indeed, the Spirit did not stay for anything, but went straight on, as to the end just now desired, until besought by Scrooge to tarry for a moment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1556">&#34;This court,&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;through which we hurry now, is where my place of occupation is, and has been for a length of time. </span>
      <span id="f1557">I see the house. </span>
      <span id="f1558">Let me behold what I shall be, in days to come!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1559">The Spirit stopped; the hand was pointed elsewhere.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1560">&#34;The house is yonder,&#34; Scrooge exclaimed. </span>
      <span id="f1561">&#34;Why do you point away?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1562">The inexorable finger underwent no change.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1563">Scrooge hastened to the window of his office, and looked in. </span>
      <span id="f1564">It was an office still, but not his. </span>
      <span id="f1565">The furniture was not the same, and the figure in the chair was not himself. </span>
      <span id="f1566">The Phantom pointed as before.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1567">He joined it once again, and wondering why and whither he had gone, accompanied it until they reached an iron gate. </span>
      <span id="f1568">He paused to look round before entering.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1569">A churchyard. </span>
      <span id="f1570">Here, then; the wretched man whose name he had now to learn, lay underneath the ground. </span>
      <span id="f1571">It was a worthy place. </span>
      <span id="f1572">Walled in by houses; overrun by grass and weeds, the growth of vegetation&#39;s death, not life; choked up with too much burying; fat with repleted appetite. </span>
      <span id="f1573">A worthy place!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1574">The Spirit stood among the graves, and pointed down to One. </span>
      <span id="f1575">He advanced towards it trembling. </span>
      <span id="f1576">The Phantom was exactly as it had been, but he dreaded that he saw new meaning in its solemn shape.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1577">&#34;Before I draw nearer to that stone to which you point,&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;answer me one question. </span>
      <span id="f1578">Are these the shadows of the things that Will be, or are they shadows of things that May be, only?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1579">Still the Ghost pointed downward to the grave by which it stood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1580">&#34;Men&#39;s courses will foreshadow certain ends, to which, if persevered in, they must lead,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1581">&#34;But if the courses be departed from, the ends will change. </span>
      <span id="f1582">Say it is thus with what you show me!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1583">The Spirit was immovable as ever.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1584">Scrooge crept towards it, trembling as he went; and following the finger, read upon the stone of the neglected grave his own name, EBENEZER SCROOGE.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1585">&#34;Am I that man who lay upon the bed?&#34; he cried, upon his knees.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1586">The finger pointed from the grave to him, and back again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1587">&#34;No, Spirit! </span>
      <span id="f1588">Oh no, no!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1589">The finger still was there.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1590">&#34;Spirit!&#34; he cried, tight clutching at its robe, &#34;hear me! </span>
      <span id="f1591">I am not the man I was. </span>
      <span id="f1592">I will not be the man I must have been but for this intercourse. </span>
      <span id="f1593">Why show me this, if I am past all hope!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1594">For the first time the hand appeared to shake.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1595">&#34;Good Spirit,&#34; he pursued, as down upon the ground he fell before it: &#34;Your nature intercedes for me, and pities me. </span>
      <span id="f1596">Assure me that I yet may change these shadows you have shown me, by an altered life!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1597">The kind hand trembled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1598">&#34;I will honour Christmas in my heart, and try to keep it all the year. </span>
      <span id="f1599">I will live in the Past, the Present, and the Future. </span>
      <span id="f1600">The Spirits of all Three shall strive within me. </span>
      <span id="f1601">I will not shut out the lessons that they teach. </span>
      <span id="f1602">Oh, tell me I may sponge away the writing on this stone!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1603">In his agony, he caught the spectral hand. </span>
      <span id="f1604">It sought to free itself, but he was strong in his entreaty, and detained it. </span>
      <span id="f1605">The Spirit, stronger yet, repulsed him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1606">Holding up his hands in a last prayer to have his fate reversed, he saw an alteration in the Phantom&#39;s hood and dress. </span>
      <span id="f1607">It shrunk, collapsed, and dwindled down into a bedpost.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>