<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>STAVE V:  THE END OF IT</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1608">STAVE V:  THE END OF IT</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1609">YES! </span>
      <span id="f1610">and the bedpost was his own. </span>
      <span id="f1611">The bed was his own, the room was his own. </span>
      <span id="f1612">Best and happiest of all, the Time before him was his own, to make amends in!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1613">&#34;I will live in the Past, the Present, and the Future!&#34; Scrooge repeated, as he scrambled out of bed. </span>
      <span id="f1614">&#34;The Spirits of all Three shall strive within me. </span>
      <span id="f1615">Oh Jacob Marley! </span>
      <span id="f1616">Heaven, and the Christmas Time be praised for this! </span>
      <span id="f1617">I say it on my knees, old Jacob; on my knees!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1618">He was so fluttered and so glowing with his good intentions, that his broken voice would scarcely answer to his call. </span>
      <span id="f1619">He had been sobbing violently in his conflict with the Spirit, and his face was wet with tears.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1620">&#34;They are not torn down,&#34; cried Scrooge, folding one of his bed-curtains in his arms, &#34;they are not torn down, rings and all. </span>
      <span id="f1621">They are here--I am here--the shadows of the things that would have been, may be dispelled. </span>
      <span id="f1622">They will be. </span>
      <span id="f1623">I know they will!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1624">His hands were busy with his garments all this time; turning them inside out, putting them on upside down, tearing them, mislaying them, making them parties to every kind of extravagance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1625">&#34;I don&#39;t know what to do!&#34; cried Scrooge, laughing and crying in the same breath; and making a perfect Laocoön of himself with his stockings. </span>
      <span id="f1626">&#34;I am as light as a feather, I am as happy as an angel, I am as merry as a schoolboy. </span>
      <span id="f1627">I am as giddy as a drunken man. </span>
      <span id="f1628">A merry Christmas to everybody! </span>
      <span id="f1629">A happy New Year to all the world. </span>
      <span id="f1630">Hallo here! </span>
      <span id="f1631">Whoop! </span>
      <span id="f1632">Hallo!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1633">He had frisked into the sitting-room, and was now standing there: perfectly winded.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1634">&#34;There&#39;s the saucepan that the gruel was in!&#34; cried Scrooge, starting off again, and going round the fireplace. </span>
      <span id="f1635">&#34;There&#39;s the door, by which the Ghost of Jacob Marley entered! </span>
      <span id="f1636">There&#39;s the corner where the Ghost of Christmas Present, sat! </span>
      <span id="f1637">There&#39;s the window where I saw the wandering Spirits! </span>
      <span id="f1638">It&#39;s all right, it&#39;s all true, it all happened. </span>
      <span id="f1639">Ha ha ha!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1640">Really, for a man who had been out of practice for so many years, it was a splendid laugh, a most illustrious laugh. </span>
      <span id="f1641">The father of a long, long line of brilliant laughs!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1642">&#34;I don&#39;t know what day of the month it is!&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1643">&#34;I don&#39;t know how long I&#39;ve been among the Spirits. </span>
      <span id="f1644">I don&#39;t know anything. </span>
      <span id="f1645">I&#39;m quite a baby. </span>
      <span id="f1646">Never mind. </span>
      <span id="f1647">I don&#39;t care. </span>
      <span id="f1648">I&#39;d rather be a baby. </span>
      <span id="f1649">Hallo! </span>
      <span id="f1650">Whoop! </span>
      <span id="f1651">Hallo here!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1652">He was checked in his transports by the churches ringing out the lustiest peals he had ever heard. </span>
      <span id="f1653">Clash, clang, hammer; ding, dong, bell. </span>
      <span id="f1654">Bell, dong, ding; hammer, clang, clash! </span>
      <span id="f1655">Oh, glorious, glorious!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1656">Running to the window, he opened it, and put out his head. </span>
      <span id="f1657">No fog, no mist; clear, bright, jovial, stirring, cold; cold, piping for the blood to dance to; Golden sunlight; Heavenly sky; sweet fresh air; merry bells. </span>
      <span id="f1658">Oh, glorious! </span>
      <span id="f1659">Glorious!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1660">&#34;What&#39;s to-day!&#34; cried Scrooge, calling downward to a boy in Sunday clothes, who perhaps had loitered in to look about him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1661">&#34;EH?&#34; returned the boy, with all his might of wonder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1662">&#34;What&#39;s to-day, my fine fellow?&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1663">&#34;To-day!&#34; replied the boy. </span>
      <span id="f1664">&#34;Why, CHRISTMAS DAY.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1665">&#34;It&#39;s Christmas Day!&#34; said Scrooge to himself. </span>
      <span id="f1666">&#34;I haven&#39;t missed it. </span>
      <span id="f1667">The Spirits have done it all in one night. </span>
      <span id="f1668">They can do anything they like. </span>
      <span id="f1669">Of course they can. </span>
      <span id="f1670">Of course they can. </span>
      <span id="f1671">Hallo, my fine fellow!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1672">&#34;Hallo!&#34; returned the boy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1673">&#34;Do you know the Poulterer&#39;s, in the next street but one, at the corner?&#34; Scrooge inquired.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1674">&#34;I should hope I did,&#34; replied the lad.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1675">&#34;An intelligent boy!&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1676">&#34;A remarkable boy! </span>
      <span id="f1677">Do you know whether they&#39;ve sold the prize Turkey that was hanging up there?--Not the little prize Turkey: the big one?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1678">&#34;What, the one as big as me?&#34; returned the boy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1679">&#34;What a delightful boy!&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1680">&#34;It&#39;s a pleasure to talk to him. </span>
      <span id="f1681">Yes, my buck!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1682">&#34;It&#39;s hanging there now,&#34; replied the boy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1683">&#34;Is it?&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1684">&#34;Go and buy it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1685">&#34;Walk-ER!&#34; exclaimed the boy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1686">&#34;No, no,&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;I am in earnest. </span>
      <span id="f1687">Go and buy it, and tell &#39;em to bring it here, that I may give them the direction where to take it. </span>
      <span id="f1688">Come back with the man, and I&#39;ll give you a shilling. </span>
      <span id="f1689">Come back with him in less than five minutes and I&#39;ll give you half-a-crown!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1690">The boy was off like a shot. </span>
      <span id="f1691">He must have had a steady hand at a trigger who could have got a shot off half so fast.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1692">&#34;I&#39;ll send it to Bob Cratchit&#39;s!&#34; whispered Scrooge, rubbing his hands, and splitting with a laugh. </span>
      <span id="f1693">&#34;He sha&#39;n&#39;t know who sends it. </span>
      <span id="f1694">It&#39;s twice the size of Tiny Tim. </span>
      <span id="f1695">Joe Miller never made such a joke as sending it to Bob&#39;s will be!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1696">The hand in which he wrote the address was not a steady one, but write it he did, somehow, and went down-stairs to open the street door, ready for the coming of the poulterer&#39;s man. </span>
      <span id="f1697">As he stood there, waiting his arrival, the knocker caught his eye.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1698">&#34;I shall love it, as long as I live!&#34; cried Scrooge, patting it with his hand. </span>
      <span id="f1699">&#34;I scarcely ever looked at it before. </span>
      <span id="f1700">What an honest expression it has in its face! </span>
      <span id="f1701">It&#39;s a wonderful knocker!--Here&#39;s the Turkey! </span>
      <span id="f1702">Hallo! </span>
      <span id="f1703">Whoop! </span>
      <span id="f1704">How are you! </span>
      <span id="f1705">Merry Christmas!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1706">It was a Turkey! </span>
      <span id="f1707">He never could have stood upon his legs, that bird. </span>
      <span id="f1708">He would have snapped &#39;em short off in a minute, like sticks of sealing-wax.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1709">&#34;Why, it&#39;s impossible to carry that to Camden Town,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1710">&#34;You must have a cab.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1711">The chuckle with which he said this, and the chuckle with which he paid for the Turkey, and the chuckle with which he paid for the cab, and the chuckle with which he recompensed the boy, were only to be exceeded by the chuckle with which he sat down breathless in his chair again, and chuckled till he cried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1712">Shaving was not an easy task, for his hand continued to shake very much; and shaving requires attention, even when you don&#39;t dance while you are at it. </span>
      <span id="f1713">But if he had cut the end of his nose off, he would have put a piece of sticking-plaister over it, and been quite satisfied.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1714">He dressed himself &#34;all in his best,&#34; and at last got out into the streets. </span>
      <span id="f1715">The people were by this time pouring forth, as he had seen them with the Ghost of Christmas Present; and walking with his hands behind him, Scrooge regarded every one with a delighted smile. </span>
      <span id="f1716">He looked so irresistibly pleasant, in a word, that three or four good-humoured fellows said, &#34;Good morning, sir! </span>
      <span id="f1717">A merry Christmas to you!&#34; And Scrooge said often afterwards, that of all the blithe sounds he had ever heard, those were the blithest in his ears.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1718">He had not gone far, when coming on towards him he beheld the portly gentleman, who had walked into his counting-house the day before, and said, &#34;Scrooge and Marley&#39;s, I believe?&#34;  It sent a pang across his heart to think how this old gentleman would look upon him when they met; but he knew what path lay straight before him, and he took it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1719">&#34;My dear sir,&#34; said Scrooge, quickening his pace, and taking the old gentleman by both his hands. </span>
      <span id="f1720">&#34;How do you do? </span>
      <span id="f1721">I hope you succeeded yesterday. </span>
      <span id="f1722">It was very kind of you. </span>
      <span id="f1723">A merry Christmas to you, sir!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1724">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1725">Scrooge?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1726">&#34;Yes,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1727">&#34;That is my name, and I fear it may not be pleasant to you. </span>
      <span id="f1728">Allow me to ask your pardon. </span>
      <span id="f1729">And will you have the goodness&#34;--here Scrooge whispered in his ear.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1730">&#34;Lord bless me!&#34; cried the gentleman, as if his breath were taken away. </span>
      <span id="f1731">&#34;My dear Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1732">Scrooge, are you serious?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1733">&#34;If you please,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1734">&#34;Not a farthing less. </span>
      <span id="f1735">A great many back-payments are included in it, I assure you. </span>
      <span id="f1736">Will you do me that favour?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1737">&#34;My dear sir,&#34; said the other, shaking hands with him. </span>
      <span id="f1738">&#34;I don&#39;t know what to say to such munifi--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1739">&#34;Don&#39;t say anything, please,&#34; retorted Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1740">&#34;Come and see me. </span>
      <span id="f1741">Will you come and see me?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1742">&#34;I will!&#34; cried the old gentleman. </span>
      <span id="f1743">And it was clear he meant to do it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1744">&#34;Thank&#39;ee,&#34; said Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1745">&#34;I am much obliged to you. </span>
      <span id="f1746">I thank you fifty times. </span>
      <span id="f1747">Bless you!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1748">He went to church, and walked about the streets, and watched the people hurrying to and fro, and patted children on the head, and questioned beggars, and looked down into the kitchens of houses, and up to the windows, and found that everything could yield him pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f1749">He had never dreamed that any walk--that anything--could give him so much happiness. </span>
      <span id="f1750">In the afternoon he turned his steps towards his nephew&#39;s house.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1751">He passed the door a dozen times, before he had the courage to go up and knock. </span>
      <span id="f1752">But he made a dash, and did it:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1753">&#34;Is your master at home, my dear?&#34; said Scrooge to the girl. </span>
      <span id="f1754">Nice girl! </span>
      <span id="f1755">Very.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1756">&#34;Yes, sir.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1757">&#34;Where is he, my love?&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1758">&#34;He&#39;s in the dining-room, sir, along with mistress. </span>
      <span id="f1759">I&#39;ll show you up-stairs, if you please.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1760">&#34;Thank&#39;ee. </span>
      <span id="f1761">He knows me,&#34; said Scrooge, with his hand already on the dining-room lock. </span>
      <span id="f1762">&#34;I&#39;ll go in here, my dear.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1763">He turned it gently, and sidled his face in, round the door. </span>
      <span id="f1764">They were looking at the table (which was spread out in great array); for these young housekeepers are always nervous on such points, and like to see that everything is right.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1765">&#34;Fred!&#34; said Scrooge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1766">Dear heart alive, how his niece by marriage started! </span>
      <span id="f1767">Scrooge had forgotten, for the moment, about her sitting in the corner with the footstool, or he wouldn&#39;t have done it, on any account.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1768">&#34;Why bless my soul!&#34; cried Fred, &#34;who&#39;s that?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1769">&#34;It&#39;s I. </span>
      <span id="f1770">Your uncle Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1771">I have come to dinner. </span>
      <span id="f1772">Will you let me in, Fred?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1773">Let him in! </span>
      <span id="f1774">It is a mercy he didn&#39;t shake his arm off. </span>
      <span id="f1775">He was at home in five minutes. </span>
      <span id="f1776">Nothing could be heartier. </span>
      <span id="f1777">His niece looked just the same. </span>
      <span id="f1778">So did Topper when he came. </span>
      <span id="f1779">So did the plump sister when she came. </span>
      <span id="f1780">So did every one when they came. </span>
      <span id="f1781">Wonderful party, wonderful games, wonderful unanimity, won-der-ful happiness!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1782">But he was early at the office next morning. </span>
      <span id="f1783">Oh, he was early there. </span>
      <span id="f1784">If he could only be there first, and catch Bob Cratchit coming late! </span>
      <span id="f1785">That was the thing he had set his heart upon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1786">And he did it; yes, he did! </span>
      <span id="f1787">The clock struck nine. </span>
      <span id="f1788">No Bob. </span>
      <span id="f1789">A quarter past. </span>
      <span id="f1790">No Bob. </span>
      <span id="f1791">He was full eighteen minutes and a half behind his time. </span>
      <span id="f1792">Scrooge sat with his door wide open, that he might see him come into the Tank.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1793">His hat was off, before he opened the door; his comforter too. </span>
      <span id="f1794">He was on his stool in a jiffy; driving away with his pen, as if he were trying to overtake nine o&#39;clock.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1795">&#34;Hallo!&#34; growled Scrooge, in his accustomed voice, as near as he could feign it. </span>
      <span id="f1796">&#34;What do you mean by coming here at this time of day?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1797">&#34;I am very sorry, sir,&#34; said Bob. </span>
      <span id="f1798">&#34;I am behind my time.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1799">&#34;You are?&#34; repeated Scrooge. </span>
      <span id="f1800">&#34;Yes. </span>
      <span id="f1801">I think you are. </span>
      <span id="f1802">Step this way, sir, if you please.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1803">&#34;It&#39;s only once a year, sir,&#34; pleaded Bob, appearing from the Tank. </span>
      <span id="f1804">&#34;It shall not be repeated. </span>
      <span id="f1805">I was making rather merry yesterday, sir.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1806">&#34;Now, I&#39;ll tell you what, my friend,&#34; said Scrooge, &#34;I am not going to stand this sort of thing any longer. </span>
      <span id="f1807">And therefore,&#34; he continued, leaping from his stool, and giving Bob such a dig in the waistcoat that he staggered back into the Tank again; &#34;and therefore I am about to raise your salary!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1808">Bob trembled, and got a little nearer to the ruler. </span>
      <span id="f1809">He had a momentary idea of knocking Scrooge down with it, holding him, and calling to the people in the court for help and a strait-waistcoat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1810">&#34;A merry Christmas, Bob!&#34; said Scrooge, with an earnestness that could not be mistaken, as he clapped him on the back. </span>
      <span id="f1811">&#34;A merrier Christmas, Bob, my good fellow, than I have given you, for many a year! </span>
      <span id="f1812">I&#39;ll raise your salary, and endeavour to assist your struggling family, and we will discuss your affairs this very afternoon, over a Christmas bowl of smoking bishop, Bob! </span>
      <span id="f1813">Make up the fires, and buy another coal-scuttle before you dot another i, Bob Cratchit!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1814">Scrooge was better than his word. </span>
      <span id="f1815">He did it all, and infinitely more; and to Tiny Tim, who did NOT die, he was a second father. </span>
      <span id="f1816">He became as good a friend, as good a master, and as good a man, as the good old city knew, or any other good old city, town, or borough, in the good old world. </span>
      <span id="f1817">Some people laughed to see the alteration in him, but he let them laugh, and little heeded them; for he was wise enough to know that nothing ever happened on this globe, for good, at which some people did not have their fill of laughter in the outset; and knowing that such as these would be blind anyway, he thought it quite as well that they should wrinkle up their eyes in grins, as have the malady in less attractive forms. </span>
      <span id="f1818">His own heart laughed: and that was quite enough for him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1819">He had no further intercourse with Spirits, but lived upon the Total Abstinence Principle, ever afterwards; and it was always said of him, that he knew how to keep Christmas well, if any man alive possessed the knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f1820">May that be truly said of us, and all of us! </span>
      <span id="f1821">And so, as Tiny Tim observed, God bless Us, Every One!</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>