<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER III. A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0159">CHAPTER III. A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0161">They were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the bank—the birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0162">The first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite natural to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if she had known them all her life. </span>
      <span id="f0163">Indeed, she had quite a long argument with the Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, “I am older than you, and must know better;” and this Alice would not allow without knowing how old it was, and, as the Lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no more to be said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0164">At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among them, called out, “Sit down, all of you, and listen to me! </span>
      <span id="f0165">_I’ll_ soon make you dry enough!” They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the Mouse in the middle. </span>
      <span id="f0166">Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0167">“Ahem!” said the Mouse with an important air, “are you all ready? </span>
      <span id="f0168">This is the driest thing I know. </span>
      <span id="f0169">Silence all round, if you please! </span>
      <span id="f0170">‘William the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was soon submitted to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much accustomed to usurpation and conquest. </span>
      <span id="f0171">Edwin and Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria—’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0172">“Ugh!” said the Lory, with a shiver.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0173">“I beg your pardon!” said the Mouse, frowning, but very politely: “Did you speak?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0174">“Not I!” said the Lory hastily.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0175">“I thought you did,” said the Mouse. </span>
      <span id="f0176">“—I proceed. </span>
      <span id="f0177">‘Edwin and Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him: and even Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found it advisable—’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0178">“Found _what_?” said the Duck.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0179">“Found _it_,” the Mouse replied rather crossly: “of course you know what ‘it’ means.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0180">“I know what ‘it’ means well enough, when _I_ find a thing,” said the Duck: “it’s generally a frog or a worm. </span>
      <span id="f0181">The question is, what did the archbishop find?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0182">The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, “‘—found it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer him the crown. </span>
      <span id="f0183">William’s conduct at first was moderate. </span>
      <span id="f0184">But the insolence of his Normans—’ How are you getting on now, my dear?” it continued, turning to Alice as it spoke.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0185">“As wet as ever,” said Alice in a melancholy tone: “it doesn’t seem to dry me at all.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0186">“In that case,” said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, “I move that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more energetic remedies—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0187">“Speak English!” said the Eaglet. </span>
      <span id="f0188">“I don’t know the meaning of half those long words, and, what’s more, I don’t believe you do either!” And the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the other birds tittered audibly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0189">“What I was going to say,” said the Dodo in an offended tone, “was, that the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucus-race.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0190">“What _is_ a Caucus-race?” said Alice; not that she wanted much to know, but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that _somebody_ ought to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0191">“Why,” said the Dodo, “the best way to explain it is to do it.” (And, as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter day, I will tell you how the Dodo managed it.)</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0192">First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, (“the exact shape doesn’t matter,” it said,) and then all the party were placed along the course, here and there. </span>
      <span id="f0193">There was no “One, two, three, and away,” but they began running when they liked, and left off when they liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over. </span>
      <span id="f0194">However, when they had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the Dodo suddenly called out “The race is over!” and they all crowded round it, panting, and asking, “But who has won?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0195">This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon its forehead (the position in which you usually see Shakespeare, in the pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence. </span>
      <span id="f0196">At last the Dodo said, “_Everybody_ has won, and all must have prizes.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0197">“But who is to give the prizes?” quite a chorus of voices asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0198">“Why, _she_, of course,” said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with one finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a confused way, “Prizes! </span>
      <span id="f0199">Prizes!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0200">Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt water had not got into it), and handed them round as prizes. </span>
      <span id="f0201">There was exactly one a-piece, all round.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0202">“But she must have a prize herself, you know,” said the Mouse.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0203">“Of course,” the Dodo replied very gravely. </span>
      <span id="f0204">“What else have you got in your pocket?” he went on, turning to Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0205">“Only a thimble,” said Alice sadly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0206">“Hand it over here,” said the Dodo.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0207">Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo solemnly presented the thimble, saying “We beg your acceptance of this elegant thimble;” and, when it had finished this short speech, they all cheered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0208">Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so grave that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as she could.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0209">The next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise and confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not taste theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back. </span>
      <span id="f0210">However, it was over at last, and they sat down again in a ring, and begged the Mouse to tell them something more.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0211">“You promised to tell me your history, you know,” said Alice, “and why it is you hate—C and D,” she added in a whisper, half afraid that it would be offended again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0212">“Mine is a long and a sad tale!” said the Mouse, turning to Alice, and sighing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0213">“It _is_ a long tail, certainly,” said Alice, looking down with wonder at the Mouse’s tail; “but why do you call it sad?” And she kept on puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the tale was something like this:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0214">“Fury said to a mouse, That he met in the house, ‘Let us both          go to law: _I_ will prosecute _you_.—Come, I’ll take no          denial; We must have a trial: For really this morning I’ve          nothing to do.’ Said the mouse to the cur, ‘Such a trial, dear          sir, With no jury or judge, would be wasting our breath.’          ‘I’ll be judge, I’ll be jury,’ Said cunning old Fury: ‘I’ll          try the whole cause, and condemn you to death.’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0215">“You are not attending!” said the Mouse to Alice severely. </span>
      <span id="f0216">“What are you thinking of?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0217">“I beg your pardon,” said Alice very humbly: “you had got to the fifth bend, I think?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0218">“I had _not!_” cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0219">“A knot!” said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and looking anxiously about her. </span>
      <span id="f0220">“Oh, do let me help to undo it!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0221">“I shall do nothing of the sort,” said the Mouse, getting up and walking away. </span>
      <span id="f0222">“You insult me by talking such nonsense!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0223">“I didn’t mean it!” pleaded poor Alice. </span>
      <span id="f0224">“But you’re so easily offended, you know!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0225">The Mouse only growled in reply.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0226">“Please come back and finish your story!” Alice called after it; and the others all joined in chorus, “Yes, please do!” but the Mouse only shook its head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0227">“What a pity it wouldn’t stay!” sighed the Lory, as soon as it was quite out of sight; and an old Crab took the opportunity of saying to her daughter “Ah, my dear! </span>
      <span id="f0228">Let this be a lesson to you never to lose _your_ temper!” “Hold your tongue, Ma!” said the young Crab, a little snappishly. </span>
      <span id="f0229">“You’re enough to try the patience of an oyster!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0230">“I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!” said Alice aloud, addressing nobody in particular. </span>
      <span id="f0231">“She’d soon fetch it back!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0232">“And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?” said the Lory.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0233">Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet: “Dinah’s our cat. </span>
      <span id="f0234">And she’s such a capital one for catching mice you can’t think! </span>
      <span id="f0235">And oh, I wish you could see her after the birds! </span>
      <span id="f0236">Why, she’ll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0237">This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. </span>
      <span id="f0238">Some of the birds hurried off at once: one old Magpie began wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking, “I really must be getting home; the night-air doesn’t suit my throat!” and a Canary called out in a trembling voice to its children, “Come away, my dears! </span>
      <span id="f0239">It’s high time you were all in bed!” On various pretexts they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0240">“I wish I hadn’t mentioned Dinah!” she said to herself in a melancholy tone. </span>
      <span id="f0241">“Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I’m sure she’s the best cat in the world! </span>
      <span id="f0242">Oh, my dear Dinah! </span>
      <span id="f0243">I wonder if I shall ever see you any more!” And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and low-spirited. </span>
      <span id="f0244">In a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to finish his story.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>