<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER V. Advice from a Caterpillar</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0361">CHAPTER V. Advice from a Caterpillar</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0363">The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some time in silence: at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0364">“Who are _you?_” said the Caterpillar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0365">This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. </span>
      <span id="f0366">Alice replied, rather shyly, “I—I hardly know, sir, just at present—at least I know who I _was_ when I got up this morning, but I think I must have been changed several times since then.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0367">“What do you mean by that?” said the Caterpillar sternly. </span>
      <span id="f0368">“Explain yourself!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0369">“I can’t explain _myself_, I’m afraid, sir,” said Alice, “because I’m not myself, you see.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0370">“I don’t see,” said the Caterpillar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0371">“I’m afraid I can’t put it more clearly,” Alice replied very politely, “for I can’t understand it myself to begin with; and being so many different sizes in a day is very confusing.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0372">“It isn’t,” said the Caterpillar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0373">“Well, perhaps you haven’t found it so yet,” said Alice; “but when you have to turn into a chrysalis—you will some day, you know—and then after that into a butterfly, I should think you’ll feel it a little queer, won’t you?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0374">“Not a bit,” said the Caterpillar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0375">“Well, perhaps your feelings may be different,” said Alice; “all I know is, it would feel very queer to _me_.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0376">“You!” said the Caterpillar contemptuously. </span>
      <span id="f0377">“Who are _you?_”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0378">Which brought them back again to the beginning of the conversation. </span>
      <span id="f0379">Alice felt a little irritated at the Caterpillar’s making such _very_ short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, “I think, you ought to tell me who _you_ are, first.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0380">“Why?” said the Caterpillar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0381">Here was another puzzling question; and as Alice could not think of any good reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in a _very_ unpleasant state of mind, she turned away.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0382">“Come back!” the Caterpillar called after her. </span>
      <span id="f0383">“I’ve something important to say!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0384">This sounded promising, certainly: Alice turned and came back again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0385">“Keep your temper,” said the Caterpillar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0386">“Is that all?” said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as she could.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0387">“No,” said the Caterpillar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0388">Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do, and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing. </span>
      <span id="f0389">For some minutes it puffed away without speaking, but at last it unfolded its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said, “So you think you’re changed, do you?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0390">“I’m afraid I am, sir,” said Alice; “I can’t remember things as I used—and I don’t keep the same size for ten minutes together!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0391">“Can’t remember _what_ things?” said the Caterpillar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0392">“Well, I’ve tried to say “How doth the little busy bee,” but it all came different!” Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0393">“Repeat, “_You are old, Father William_,’” said the Caterpillar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0394">Alice folded her hands, and began:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0395">“You are old, Father William,” the young man said,     “And your hair has become very white; And yet you incessantly stand on your head—     Do you think, at your age, it is right?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0396">“In my youth,” Father William replied to his son,     “I feared it might injure the brain; But, now that I’m perfectly sure I have none,     Why, I do it again and again.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0397">“You are old,” said the youth, “as I mentioned before,     And have grown most uncommonly fat; Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door—     Pray, what is the reason of that?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0398">“In my youth,” said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,     “I kept all my limbs very supple By the use of this ointment—one shilling the box—     Allow me to sell you a couple?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0399">“You are old,” said the youth, “and your jaws are too weak     For anything tougher than suet; Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak—     Pray, how did you manage to do it?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0400">“In my youth,” said his father, “I took to the law,     And argued each case with my wife; And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,     Has lasted the rest of my life.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0401">“You are old,” said the youth, “one would hardly suppose     That your eye was as steady as ever; Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose—     What made you so awfully clever?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0402">“I have answered three questions, and that is enough,”     Said his father; “don’t give yourself airs! </span>
      <span id="f0403">Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff? </span>
      <span id="f0404">    Be off, or I’ll kick you down stairs!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0405">“That is not said right,” said the Caterpillar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0406">“Not _quite_ right, I’m afraid,” said Alice, timidly; “some of the words have got altered.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0407">“It is wrong from beginning to end,” said the Caterpillar decidedly, and there was silence for some minutes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0408">The Caterpillar was the first to speak.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0409">“What size do you want to be?” it asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0410">“Oh, I’m not particular as to size,” Alice hastily replied; “only one doesn’t like changing so often, you know.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0411">“I _don’t_ know,” said the Caterpillar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0412">Alice said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in her life before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0413">“Are you content now?” said the Caterpillar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0414">“Well, I should like to be a _little_ larger, sir, if you wouldn’t mind,” said Alice: “three inches is such a wretched height to be.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0415">“It is a very good height indeed!” said the Caterpillar angrily, rearing itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three inches high).</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0416">“But I’m not used to it!” pleaded poor Alice in a piteous tone. </span>
      <span id="f0417">And she thought of herself, “I wish the creatures wouldn’t be so easily offended!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0418">“You’ll get used to it in time,” said the Caterpillar; and it put the hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0419">This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again. </span>
      <span id="f0420">In a minute or two the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth and yawned once or twice, and shook itself. </span>
      <span id="f0421">Then it got down off the mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely remarking as it went, “One side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you grow shorter.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0422">“One side of _what?_ The other side of _what?_” thought Alice to herself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0423">“Of the mushroom,” said the Caterpillar, just as if she had asked it aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0424">Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute, trying to make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was perfectly round, she found this a very difficult question. </span>
      <span id="f0425">However, at last she stretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke off a bit of the edge with each hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0426">“And now which is which?” she said to herself, and nibbled a little of the right-hand bit to try the effect: the next moment she felt a violent blow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0427">She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she felt that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so she set to work at once to eat some of the other bit. </span>
      <span id="f0428">Her chin was pressed so closely against her foot, that there was hardly room to open her mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of the lefthand bit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0429">*      *      *      *      *      *      *</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0430">*      *      *      *      *      *</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0431">*      *      *      *      *      *      *</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0432">“Come, my head’s free at last!” said Alice in a tone of delight, which changed into alarm in another moment, when she found that her shoulders were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a sea of green leaves that lay far below her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0433">“What _can_ all that green stuff be?” said Alice. </span>
      <span id="f0434">“And where _have_ my shoulders got to? </span>
      <span id="f0435">And oh, my poor hands, how is it I can’t see you?” She was moving them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow, except a little shaking among the distant green leaves.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0436">As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head, she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted to find that her neck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent. </span>
      <span id="f0437">She had just succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was going to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be nothing but the tops of the trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made her draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her face, and was beating her violently with its wings.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0438">“Serpent!” screamed the Pigeon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0439">“I’m _not_ a serpent!” said Alice indignantly. </span>
      <span id="f0440">“Let me alone!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0441">“Serpent, I say again!” repeated the Pigeon, but in a more subdued tone, and added with a kind of sob, “I’ve tried every way, and nothing seems to suit them!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0442">“I haven’t the least idea what you’re talking about,” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0443">“I’ve tried the roots of trees, and I’ve tried banks, and I’ve tried hedges,” the Pigeon went on, without attending to her; “but those serpents! </span>
      <span id="f0444">There’s no pleasing them!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0445">Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use in saying anything more till the Pigeon had finished.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0446">“As if it wasn’t trouble enough hatching the eggs,” said the Pigeon; “but I must be on the look-out for serpents night and day! </span>
      <span id="f0447">Why, I haven’t had a wink of sleep these three weeks!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0448">“I’m very sorry you’ve been annoyed,” said Alice, who was beginning to see its meaning.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0449">“And just as I’d taken the highest tree in the wood,” continued the Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, “and just as I was thinking I should be free of them at last, they must needs come wriggling down from the sky! </span>
      <span id="f0450">Ugh, Serpent!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0451">“But I’m _not_ a serpent, I tell you!” said Alice. </span>
      <span id="f0452">“I’m a—I’m a—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0453">“Well! </span>
      <span id="f0454">_What_ are you?” said the Pigeon. </span>
      <span id="f0455">“I can see you’re trying to invent something!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0456">“I—I’m a little girl,” said Alice, rather doubtfully, as she remembered the number of changes she had gone through that day.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0457">“A likely story indeed!” said the Pigeon in a tone of the deepest contempt. </span>
      <span id="f0458">“I’ve seen a good many little girls in my time, but never _one_ with such a neck as that! </span>
      <span id="f0459">No, no! </span>
      <span id="f0460">You’re a serpent; and there’s no use denying it. </span>
      <span id="f0461">I suppose you’ll be telling me next that you never tasted an egg!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0462">“I _have_ tasted eggs, certainly,” said Alice, who was a very truthful child; “but little girls eat eggs quite as much as serpents do, you know.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0463">“I don’t believe it,” said the Pigeon; “but if they do, why then they’re a kind of serpent, that’s all I can say.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0464">This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent for a minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of adding, “You’re looking for eggs, I know _that_ well enough; and what does it matter to me whether you’re a little girl or a serpent?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0465">“It matters a good deal to _me_,” said Alice hastily; “but I’m not looking for eggs, as it happens; and if I was, I shouldn’t want _yours_: I don’t like them raw.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0466">“Well, be off, then!” said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settled down again into its nest. </span>
      <span id="f0467">Alice crouched down among the trees as well as she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches, and every now and then she had to stop and untwist it. </span>
      <span id="f0468">After a while she remembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands, and she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0469">It was so long since she had been anything near the right size, that it felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes, and began talking to herself, as usual. </span>
      <span id="f0470">“Come, there’s half my plan done now! </span>
      <span id="f0471">How puzzling all these changes are! </span>
      <span id="f0472">I’m never sure what I’m going to be, from one minute to another! </span>
      <span id="f0473">However, I’ve got back to my right size: the next thing is, to get into that beautiful garden—how _is_ that to be done, I wonder?” As she said this, she came suddenly upon an open place, with a little house in it about four feet high. </span>
      <span id="f0474">“Whoever lives there,” thought Alice, “it’ll never do to come upon them _this_ size: why, I should frighten them out of their wits!” So she began nibbling at the righthand bit again, and did not venture to go near the house till she had brought herself down to nine inches high.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>