<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER VII. A Mad Tea-Party</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0613">CHAPTER VII. A Mad Tea-Party</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0615">There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and the March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it: a Dormouse was sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other two were using it as a cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking over its head. </span>
      <span id="f0616">“Very uncomfortable for the Dormouse,” thought Alice; “only, as it’s asleep, I suppose it doesn’t mind.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0617">The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at one corner of it: “No room! </span>
      <span id="f0618">No room!” they cried out when they saw Alice coming. </span>
      <span id="f0619">“There’s _plenty_ of room!” said Alice indignantly, and she sat down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0620">“Have some wine,” the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0621">Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it but tea. </span>
      <span id="f0622">“I don’t see any wine,” she remarked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0623">“There isn’t any,” said the March Hare.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0624">“Then it wasn’t very civil of you to offer it,” said Alice angrily.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0625">“It wasn’t very civil of you to sit down without being invited,” said the March Hare.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0626">“I didn’t know it was _your_ table,” said Alice; “it’s laid for a great many more than three.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0627">“Your hair wants cutting,” said the Hatter. </span>
      <span id="f0628">He had been looking at Alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was his first speech.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0629">“You should learn not to make personal remarks,” Alice said with some severity; “it’s very rude.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0630">The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he _said_ was, “Why is a raven like a writing-desk?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0631">“Come, we shall have some fun now!” thought Alice. </span>
      <span id="f0632">“I’m glad they’ve begun asking riddles.—I believe I can guess that,” she added aloud.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0633">“Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?” said the March Hare.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0634">“Exactly so,” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0635">“Then you should say what you mean,” the March Hare went on.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0636">“I do,” Alice hastily replied; “at least—at least I mean what I say—that’s the same thing, you know.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0637">“Not the same thing a bit!” said the Hatter. </span>
      <span id="f0638">“You might just as well say that ‘I see what I eat’ is the same thing as ‘I eat what I see’!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0639">“You might just as well say,” added the March Hare, “that ‘I like what I get’ is the same thing as ‘I get what I like’!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0640">“You might just as well say,” added the Dormouse, who seemed to be talking in his sleep, “that ‘I breathe when I sleep’ is the same thing as ‘I sleep when I breathe’!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0641">“It _is_ the same thing with you,” said the Hatter, and here the conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while Alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and writing-desks, which wasn’t much.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0642">The Hatter was the first to break the silence. </span>
      <span id="f0643">“What day of the month is it?” he said, turning to Alice: he had taken his watch out of his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then, and holding it to his ear.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0644">Alice considered a little, and then said “The fourth.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0645">“Two days wrong!” sighed the Hatter. </span>
      <span id="f0646">“I told you butter wouldn’t suit the works!” he added looking angrily at the March Hare.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0647">“It was the _best_ butter,” the March Hare meekly replied.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0648">“Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,” the Hatter grumbled: “you shouldn’t have put it in with the bread-knife.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0649">The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of nothing better to say than his first remark, “It was the _best_ butter, you know.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0650">Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. </span>
      <span id="f0651">“What a funny watch!” she remarked. </span>
      <span id="f0652">“It tells the day of the month, and doesn’t tell what o’clock it is!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0653">“Why should it?” muttered the Hatter. </span>
      <span id="f0654">“Does _your_ watch tell you what year it is?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0655">“Of course not,” Alice replied very readily: “but that’s because it stays the same year for such a long time together.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0656">“Which is just the case with _mine_,” said the Hatter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0657">Alice felt dreadfully puzzled. </span>
      <span id="f0658">The Hatter’s remark seemed to have no sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English. </span>
      <span id="f0659">“I don’t quite understand you,” she said, as politely as she could.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0660">“The Dormouse is asleep again,” said the Hatter, and he poured a little hot tea upon its nose.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0661">The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without opening its eyes, “Of course, of course; just what I was going to remark myself.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0662">“Have you guessed the riddle yet?” the Hatter said, turning to Alice again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0663">“No, I give it up,” Alice replied: “what’s the answer?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0664">“I haven’t the slightest idea,” said the Hatter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0665">“Nor I,” said the March Hare.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0666">Alice sighed wearily. </span>
      <span id="f0667">“I think you might do something better with the time,” she said, “than waste it in asking riddles that have no answers.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0668">“If you knew Time as well as I do,” said the Hatter, “you wouldn’t talk about wasting _it_. </span>
      <span id="f0669">It’s _him_.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0670">“I don’t know what you mean,” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0671">“Of course you don’t!” the Hatter said, tossing his head contemptuously. </span>
      <span id="f0672">“I dare say you never even spoke to Time!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0673">“Perhaps not,” Alice cautiously replied: “but I know I have to beat time when I learn music.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0674">“Ah! </span>
      <span id="f0675">that accounts for it,” said the Hatter. </span>
      <span id="f0676">“He won’t stand beating. </span>
      <span id="f0677">Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he’d do almost anything you liked with the clock. </span>
      <span id="f0678">For instance, suppose it were nine o’clock in the morning, just time to begin lessons: you’d only have to whisper a hint to Time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling! </span>
      <span id="f0679">Half-past one, time for dinner!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0680">(“I only wish it was,” the March Hare said to itself in a whisper.)</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0681">“That would be grand, certainly,” said Alice thoughtfully: “but then—I shouldn’t be hungry for it, you know.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0682">“Not at first, perhaps,” said the Hatter: “but you could keep it to half-past one as long as you liked.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0683">“Is that the way _you_ manage?” Alice asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0684">The Hatter shook his head mournfully. </span>
      <span id="f0685">“Not I!” he replied. </span>
      <span id="f0686">“We quarrelled last March—just before _he_ went mad, you know—” (pointing with his tea spoon at the March Hare,) “—it was at the great concert given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0687">‘Twinkle, twinkle, little bat! </span>
      <span id="f0688">How I wonder what you’re at!’</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0689">You know the song, perhaps?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0690">“I’ve heard something like it,” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0691">“It goes on, you know,” the Hatter continued, “in this way:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0692">‘Up above the world you fly, Like a tea-tray in the sky. </span>
      <span id="f0693">                    Twinkle, twinkle—’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0694">Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep “_Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle_—” and went on so long that they had to pinch it to make it stop.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0695">“Well, I’d hardly finished the first verse,” said the Hatter, “when the Queen jumped up and bawled out, ‘He’s murdering the time! </span>
      <span id="f0696">Off with his head!’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0697">“How dreadfully savage!” exclaimed Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0698">“And ever since that,” the Hatter went on in a mournful tone, “he won’t do a thing I ask! </span>
      <span id="f0699">It’s always six o’clock now.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0700">A bright idea came into Alice’s head. </span>
      <span id="f0701">“Is that the reason so many tea-things are put out here?” she asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0702">“Yes, that’s it,” said the Hatter with a sigh: “it’s always tea-time, and we’ve no time to wash the things between whiles.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0703">“Then you keep moving round, I suppose?” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0704">“Exactly so,” said the Hatter: “as the things get used up.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0705">“But what happens when you come to the beginning again?” Alice ventured to ask.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0706">“Suppose we change the subject,” the March Hare interrupted, yawning. </span>
      <span id="f0707">“I’m getting tired of this. </span>
      <span id="f0708">I vote the young lady tells us a story.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0709">“I’m afraid I don’t know one,” said Alice, rather alarmed at the proposal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0710">“Then the Dormouse shall!” they both cried. </span>
      <span id="f0711">“Wake up, Dormouse!” And they pinched it on both sides at once.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0712">The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0713">“I wasn’t asleep,” he said in a hoarse, feeble voice: “I heard every word you fellows were saying.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0714">“Tell us a story!” said the March Hare.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0715">“Yes, please do!” pleaded Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0716">“And be quick about it,” added the Hatter, “or you’ll be asleep again before it’s done.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0717">“Once upon a time there were three little sisters,” the Dormouse began in a great hurry; “and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie; and they lived at the bottom of a well—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0718">“What did they live on?” said Alice, who always took a great interest in questions of eating and drinking.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0719">“They lived on treacle,” said the Dormouse, after thinking a minute or two.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0720">“They couldn’t have done that, you know,” Alice gently remarked; “they’d have been ill.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0721">“So they were,” said the Dormouse; “_very_ ill.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0722">Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways of living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: “But why did they live at the bottom of a well?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0723">“Take some more tea,” the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0724">“I’ve had nothing yet,” Alice replied in an offended tone, “so I can’t take more.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0725">“You mean you can’t take _less_,” said the Hatter: “it’s very easy to take _more_ than nothing.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0726">“Nobody asked _your_ opinion,” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0727">“Who’s making personal remarks now?” the Hatter asked triumphantly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0728">Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself to some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the Dormouse, and repeated her question. </span>
      <span id="f0729">“Why did they live at the bottom of a well?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0730">The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and then said, “It was a treacle-well.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0731">“There’s no such thing!” Alice was beginning very angrily, but the Hatter and the March Hare went “Sh! </span>
      <span id="f0732">sh!” and the Dormouse sulkily remarked, “If you can’t be civil, you’d better finish the story for yourself.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0733">“No, please go on!” Alice said very humbly; “I won’t interrupt again. </span>
      <span id="f0734">I dare say there may be _one_.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0735">“One, indeed!” said the Dormouse indignantly. </span>
      <span id="f0736">However, he consented to go on. </span>
      <span id="f0737">“And so these three little sisters—they were learning to draw, you know—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0738">“What did they draw?” said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0739">“Treacle,” said the Dormouse, without considering at all this time.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0740">“I want a clean cup,” interrupted the Hatter: “let’s all move one place on.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0741">He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Hare moved into the Dormouse’s place, and Alice rather unwillingly took the place of the March Hare. </span>
      <span id="f0742">The Hatter was the only one who got any advantage from the change: and Alice was a good deal worse off than before, as the March Hare had just upset the milk-jug into his plate.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0743">Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began very cautiously: “But I don’t understand. </span>
      <span id="f0744">Where did they draw the treacle from?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0745">“You can draw water out of a water-well,” said the Hatter; “so I should think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well—eh, stupid?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0746">“But they were _in_ the well,” Alice said to the Dormouse, not choosing to notice this last remark.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0747">“Of course they were,” said the Dormouse; “—well in.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0748">This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse go on for some time without interrupting it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0749">“They were learning to draw,” the Dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; “and they drew all manner of things—everything that begins with an M—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0750">“Why with an M?” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0751">“Why not?” said the March Hare.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0752">Alice was silent.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0753">The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into a doze; but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again with a little shriek, and went on: “—that begins with an M, such as mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness—you know you say things are “much of a muchness”—did you ever see such a thing as a drawing of a muchness?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0754">“Really, now you ask me,” said Alice, very much confused, “I don’t think—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0755">“Then you shouldn’t talk,” said the Hatter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0756">This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: she got up in great disgust, and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep instantly, and neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she looked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her: the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the Dormouse into the teapot.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0757">“At any rate I’ll never go _there_ again!” said Alice as she picked her way through the wood. </span>
      <span id="f0758">“It’s the stupidest tea-party I ever was at in all my life!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0759">Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door leading right into it. </span>
      <span id="f0760">“That’s very curious!” she thought. </span>
      <span id="f0761">“But everything’s curious today. </span>
      <span id="f0762">I think I may as well go in at once.” And in she went.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0763">Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little glass table. </span>
      <span id="f0764">“Now, I’ll manage better this time,” she said to herself, and began by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door that led into the garden. </span>
      <span id="f0765">Then she went to work nibbling at the mushroom (she had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high: then she walked down the little passage: and _then_—she found herself at last in the beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the cool fountains.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>