<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER VIII. The Queen’s Croquet-Ground</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0766">CHAPTER VIII. The Queen’s Croquet-Ground</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0768">A large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busily painting them red. </span>
      <span id="f0769">Alice thought this a very curious thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard one of them say, “Look out now, Five! </span>
      <span id="f0770">Don’t go splashing paint over me like that!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0771">“I couldn’t help it,” said Five, in a sulky tone; “Seven jogged my elbow.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0772">On which Seven looked up and said, “That’s right, Five! </span>
      <span id="f0773">Always lay the blame on others!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0774">“_You’d_ better not talk!” said Five. </span>
      <span id="f0775">“I heard the Queen say only yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0776">“What for?” said the one who had spoken first.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0777">“That’s none of _your_ business, Two!” said Seven.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0778">“Yes, it _is_ his business!” said Five, “and I’ll tell him—it was for bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0779">Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun “Well, of all the unjust things—” when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also, and all of them bowed low.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0780">“Would you tell me,” said Alice, a little timidly, “why you are painting those roses?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0781">Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. </span>
      <span id="f0782">Two began in a low voice, “Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been a _red_ rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if the Queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know. </span>
      <span id="f0783">So you see, Miss, we’re doing our best, afore she comes, to—” At this moment Five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called out “The Queen! </span>
      <span id="f0784">The Queen!” and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon their faces. </span>
      <span id="f0785">There was a sound of many footsteps, and Alice looked round, eager to see the Queen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0786">First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at the corners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers did. </span>
      <span id="f0787">After these came the royal children; there were ten of them, and the little dears came jumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples: they were all ornamented with hearts. </span>
      <span id="f0788">Next came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among them Alice recognised the White Rabbit: it was talking in a hurried nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without noticing her. </span>
      <span id="f0789">Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the King’s crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this grand procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0790">Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard of such a rule at processions; “and besides, what would be the use of a procession,” thought she, “if people had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldn’t see it?” So she stood still where she was, and waited.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0791">When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked at her, and the Queen said severely “Who is this?” She said it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0792">“Idiot!” said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to Alice, she went on, “What’s your name, child?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0793">“My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,” said Alice very politely; but she added, to herself, “Why, they’re only a pack of cards, after all. </span>
      <span id="f0794">I needn’t be afraid of them!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0795">“And who are _these?_” said the Queen, pointing to the three gardeners who were lying round the rose-tree; for, you see, as they were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her own children.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0796">“How should _I_ know?” said Alice, surprised at her own courage. </span>
      <span id="f0797">“It’s no business of _mine_.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0798">The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a moment like a wild beast, screamed “Off with her head! </span>
      <span id="f0799">Off—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0800">“Nonsense!” said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the Queen was silent.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0801">The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said “Consider, my dear: she is only a child!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0802">The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave “Turn them over!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0803">The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0804">“Get up!” said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen, the royal children, and everybody else.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0805">“Leave off that!” screamed the Queen. </span>
      <span id="f0806">“You make me giddy.” And then, turning to the rose-tree, she went on, “What _have_ you been doing here?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0807">“May it please your Majesty,” said Two, in a very humble tone, going down on one knee as he spoke, “we were trying—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0808">“_I_ see!” said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses. </span>
      <span id="f0809">“Off with their heads!” and the procession moved on, three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran to Alice for protection.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0810">“You shan’t be beheaded!” said Alice, and she put them into a large flower-pot that stood near. </span>
      <span id="f0811">The three soldiers wandered about for a minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the others.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0812">“Are their heads off?” shouted the Queen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0813">“Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!” the soldiers shouted in reply.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0814">“That’s right!” shouted the Queen. </span>
      <span id="f0815">“Can you play croquet?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0816">The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question was evidently meant for her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0817">“Yes!” shouted Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0818">“Come on, then!” roared the Queen, and Alice joined the procession, wondering very much what would happen next.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0819">“It’s—it’s a very fine day!” said a timid voice at her side. </span>
      <span id="f0820">She was walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0821">“Very,” said Alice: “—where’s the Duchess?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0822">“Hush! </span>
      <span id="f0823">Hush!” said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone. </span>
      <span id="f0824">He looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered “She’s under sentence of execution.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0825">“What for?” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0826">“Did you say ‘What a pity!’?” the Rabbit asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0827">“No, I didn’t,” said Alice: “I don’t think it’s at all a pity. </span>
      <span id="f0828">I said ‘What for?’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0829">“She boxed the Queen’s ears—” the Rabbit began. </span>
      <span id="f0830">Alice gave a little scream of laughter. </span>
      <span id="f0831">“Oh, hush!” the Rabbit whispered in a frightened tone. </span>
      <span id="f0832">“The Queen will hear you! </span>
      <span id="f0833">You see, she came rather late, and the Queen said—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0834">“Get to your places!” shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each other; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game began. </span>
      <span id="f0835">Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0836">The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo: she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it _would_ twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0837">The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and shouting “Off with his head!” or “Off with her head!” about once in a minute.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0838">Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute, “and then,” thought she, “what would become of me? </span>
      <span id="f0839">They’re dreadfully fond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that there’s any one left alive!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0840">She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself “It’s the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk to.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0841">“How are you getting on?” said the Cat, as soon as there was mouth enough for it to speak with.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0842">Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. </span>
      <span id="f0843">“It’s no use speaking to it,” she thought, “till its ears have come, or at least one of them.” In another minute the whole head appeared, and then Alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her. </span>
      <span id="f0844">The Cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0845">“I don’t think they play at all fairly,” Alice began, in rather a complaining tone, “and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can’t hear oneself speak—and they don’t seem to have any rules in particular; at least, if there are, nobody attends to them—and you’ve no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, there’s the arch I’ve got to go through next walking about at the other end of the ground—and I should have croqueted the Queen’s hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it saw mine coming!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0846">“How do you like the Queen?” said the Cat in a low voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0847">“Not at all,” said Alice: “she’s so extremely—” Just then she noticed that the Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on, “—likely to win, that it’s hardly worth while finishing the game.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0848">The Queen smiled and passed on.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0849">“Who _are_ you talking to?” said the King, going up to Alice, and looking at the Cat’s head with great curiosity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0850">“It’s a friend of mine—a Cheshire Cat,” said Alice: “allow me to introduce it.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0851">“I don’t like the look of it at all,” said the King: “however, it may kiss my hand if it likes.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0852">“I’d rather not,” the Cat remarked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0853">“Don’t be impertinent,” said the King, “and don’t look at me like that!” He got behind Alice as he spoke.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0854">“A cat may look at a king,” said Alice. </span>
      <span id="f0855">“I’ve read that in some book, but I don’t remember where.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0856">“Well, it must be removed,” said the King very decidedly, and he called the Queen, who was passing at the moment, “My dear! </span>
      <span id="f0857">I wish you would have this cat removed!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0858">The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small. </span>
      <span id="f0859">“Off with his head!” she said, without even looking round.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0860">“I’ll fetch the executioner myself,” said the King eagerly, and he hurried off.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0861">Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going on, as she heard the Queen’s voice in the distance, screaming with passion. </span>
      <span id="f0862">She had already heard her sentence three of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or not. </span>
      <span id="f0863">So she went in search of her hedgehog.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0864">The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0865">By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: “but it doesn’t matter much,” thought Alice, “as all the arches are gone from this side of the ground.” So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her friend.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0866">When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite a large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0867">The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly what they said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0868">The executioner’s argument was, that you couldn’t cut off a head unless there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a thing before, and he wasn’t going to begin at _his_ time of life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0869">The King’s argument was, that anything that had a head could be beheaded, and that you weren’t to talk nonsense.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0870">The Queen’s argument was, that if something wasn’t done about it in less than no time she’d have everybody executed, all round. </span>
      <span id="f0871">(It was this last remark that had made the whole party look so grave and anxious.)</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0872">Alice could think of nothing else to say but “It belongs to the Duchess: you’d better ask _her_ about it.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0873">“She’s in prison,” the Queen said to the executioner: “fetch her here.” And the executioner went off like an arrow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0874">The Cat’s head began fading away the moment he was gone, and, by the time he had come back with the Duchess, it had entirely disappeared; so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and down looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>