<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER IX. The Mock Turtle’s Story</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0875">CHAPTER IX. The Mock Turtle’s Story</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0877">“You can’t think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!” said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into Alice’s, and they walked off together.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0878">Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so savage when they met in the kitchen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0879">“When _I’m_ a Duchess,” she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful tone though), “I won’t have any pepper in my kitchen _at all_. </span>
      <span id="f0880">Soup does very well without—Maybe it’s always pepper that makes people hot-tempered,” she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new kind of rule, “and vinegar that makes them sour—and camomile that makes them bitter—and—and barley-sugar and such things that make children sweet-tempered. </span>
      <span id="f0881">I only wish people knew _that_: then they wouldn’t be so stingy about it, you know—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0882">She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. </span>
      <span id="f0883">“You’re thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk. </span>
      <span id="f0884">I can’t tell you just now what the moral of that is, but I shall remember it in a bit.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0885">“Perhaps it hasn’t one,” Alice ventured to remark.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0886">“Tut, tut, child!” said the Duchess. </span>
      <span id="f0887">“Everything’s got a moral, if only you can find it.” And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice’s side as she spoke.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0888">Alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because the Duchess was _very_ ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the right height to rest her chin upon Alice’s shoulder, and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin. </span>
      <span id="f0889">However, she did not like to be rude, so she bore it as well as she could.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0890">“The game’s going on rather better now,” she said, by way of keeping up the conversation a little.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0891">“’Tis so,” said the Duchess: “and the moral of that is—‘Oh, ’tis love, ’tis love, that makes the world go round!’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0892">“Somebody said,” Alice whispered, “that it’s done by everybody minding their own business!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0893">“Ah, well! </span>
      <span id="f0894">It means much the same thing,” said the Duchess, digging her sharp little chin into Alice’s shoulder as she added, “and the moral of _that_ is—‘Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of themselves.’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0895">“How fond she is of finding morals in things!” Alice thought to herself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0896">“I dare say you’re wondering why I don’t put my arm round your waist,” the Duchess said after a pause: “the reason is, that I’m doubtful about the temper of your flamingo. </span>
      <span id="f0897">Shall I try the experiment?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0898">“He might bite,” Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all anxious to have the experiment tried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0899">“Very true,” said the Duchess: “flamingoes and mustard both bite. </span>
      <span id="f0900">And the moral of that is—‘Birds of a feather flock together.’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0901">“Only mustard isn’t a bird,” Alice remarked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0902">“Right, as usual,” said the Duchess: “what a clear way you have of putting things!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0903">“It’s a mineral, I _think_,” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0904">“Of course it is,” said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree to everything that Alice said; “there’s a large mustard-mine near here. </span>
      <span id="f0905">And the moral of that is—‘The more there is of mine, the less there is of yours.’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0906">“Oh, I know!” exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this last remark, “it’s a vegetable. </span>
      <span id="f0907">It doesn’t look like one, but it is.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0908">“I quite agree with you,” said the Duchess; “and the moral of that is—‘Be what you would seem to be’—or if you’d like it put more simply—‘Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it might appear to others that what you were or might have been was not otherwise than what you had been would have appeared to them to be otherwise.’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0909">“I think I should understand that better,” Alice said very politely, “if I had it written down: but I can’t quite follow it as you say it.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0910">“That’s nothing to what I could say if I chose,” the Duchess replied, in a pleased tone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0911">“Pray don’t trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0912">“Oh, don’t talk about trouble!” said the Duchess. </span>
      <span id="f0913">“I make you a present of everything I’ve said as yet.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0914">“A cheap sort of present!” thought Alice. </span>
      <span id="f0915">“I’m glad they don’t give birthday presents like that!” But she did not venture to say it out loud.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0916">“Thinking again?” the Duchess asked, with another dig of her sharp little chin.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0917">“I’ve a right to think,” said Alice sharply, for she was beginning to feel a little worried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0918">“Just about as much right,” said the Duchess, “as pigs have to fly; and the m—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0919">But here, to Alice’s great surprise, the Duchess’s voice died away, even in the middle of her favourite word ‘moral,’ and the arm that was linked into hers began to tremble. </span>
      <span id="f0920">Alice looked up, and there stood the Queen in front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0921">“A fine day, your Majesty!” the Duchess began in a low, weak voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0922">“Now, I give you fair warning,” shouted the Queen, stamping on the ground as she spoke; “either you or your head must be off, and that in about half no time! </span>
      <span id="f0923">Take your choice!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0924">The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0925">“Let’s go on with the game,” the Queen said to Alice; and Alice was too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the croquet-ground.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0926">The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen’s absence, and were resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a moment’s delay would cost them their lives.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0927">All the time they were playing the Queen never left off quarrelling with the other players, and shouting “Off with his head!” or “Off with her head!” Those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that by the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and all the players, except the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody and under sentence of execution.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0928">Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to Alice, “Have you seen the Mock Turtle yet?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0929">“No,” said Alice. </span>
      <span id="f0930">“I don’t even know what a Mock Turtle is.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0931">“It’s the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,” said the Queen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0932">“I never saw one, or heard of one,” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0933">“Come on, then,” said the Queen, “and he shall tell you his history,”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0934">As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low voice, to the company generally, “You are all pardoned.” “Come, _that’s_ a good thing!” she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at the number of executions the Queen had ordered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0935">They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun. </span>
      <span id="f0936">(If you don’t know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.) “Up, lazy thing!” said the Queen, “and take this young lady to see the Mock Turtle, and to hear his history. </span>
      <span id="f0937">I must go back and see after some executions I have ordered;” and she walked off, leaving Alice alone with the Gryphon. </span>
      <span id="f0938">Alice did not quite like the look of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage Queen: so she waited.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0939">The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen till she was out of sight: then it chuckled. </span>
      <span id="f0940">“What fun!” said the Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0941">“What _is_ the fun?” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0942">“Why, _she_,” said the Gryphon. </span>
      <span id="f0943">“It’s all her fancy, that: they never executes nobody, you know. </span>
      <span id="f0944">Come on!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0945">“Everybody says ‘come on!’ here,” thought Alice, as she went slowly after it: “I never was so ordered about in all my life, never!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0946">They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break. </span>
      <span id="f0947">She pitied him deeply. </span>
      <span id="f0948">“What is his sorrow?” she asked the Gryphon, and the Gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, “It’s all his fancy, that: he hasn’t got no sorrow, you know. </span>
      <span id="f0949">Come on!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0950">So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with large eyes full of tears, but said nothing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0951">“This here young lady,” said the Gryphon, “she wants for to know your history, she do.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0952">“I’ll tell it her,” said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow tone: “sit down, both of you, and don’t speak a word till I’ve finished.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0953">So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. </span>
      <span id="f0954">Alice thought to herself, “I don’t see how he can _ever_ finish, if he doesn’t begin.” But she waited patiently.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0955">“Once,” said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, “I was a real Turtle.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0956">These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an occasional exclamation of “Hjckrrh!” from the Gryphon, and the constant heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. </span>
      <span id="f0957">Alice was very nearly getting up and saying, “Thank you, sir, for your interesting story,” but she could not help thinking there _must_ be more to come, so she sat still and said nothing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0958">“When we were little,” the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly, though still sobbing a little now and then, “we went to school in the sea. </span>
      <span id="f0959">The master was an old Turtle—we used to call him Tortoise—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0960">“Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn’t one?” Alice asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0961">“We called him Tortoise because he taught us,” said the Mock Turtle angrily: “really you are very dull!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0962">“You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple question,” added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. </span>
      <span id="f0963">At last the Gryphon said to the Mock Turtle, “Drive on, old fellow! </span>
      <span id="f0964">Don’t be all day about it!” and he went on in these words:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0965">“Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn’t believe it—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0966">“I never said I didn’t!” interrupted Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0967">“You did,” said the Mock Turtle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0968">“Hold your tongue!” added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak again. </span>
      <span id="f0969">The Mock Turtle went on.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0970">“We had the best of educations—in fact, we went to school every day—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0971">“_I’ve_ been to a day-school, too,” said Alice; “you needn’t be so proud as all that.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0972">“With extras?” asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0973">“Yes,” said Alice, “we learned French and music.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0974">“And washing?” said the Mock Turtle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0975">“Certainly not!” said Alice indignantly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0976">“Ah! </span>
      <span id="f0977">then yours wasn’t a really good school,” said the Mock Turtle in a tone of great relief. </span>
      <span id="f0978">“Now at _ours_ they had at the end of the bill, ‘French, music, _and washing_—extra.’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0979">“You couldn’t have wanted it much,” said Alice; “living at the bottom of the sea.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0980">“I couldn’t afford to learn it.” said the Mock Turtle with a sigh. </span>
      <span id="f0981">“I only took the regular course.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0982">“What was that?” inquired Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0983">“Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,” the Mock Turtle replied; “and then the different branches of Arithmetic—Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0984">“I never heard of ‘Uglification,’” Alice ventured to say. </span>
      <span id="f0985">“What is it?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0986">The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. </span>
      <span id="f0987">“What! </span>
      <span id="f0988">Never heard of uglifying!” it exclaimed. </span>
      <span id="f0989">“You know what to beautify is, I suppose?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0990">“Yes,” said Alice doubtfully: “it means—to—make—anything—prettier.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0991">“Well, then,” the Gryphon went on, “if you don’t know what to uglify is, you _are_ a simpleton.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0992">Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so she turned to the Mock Turtle, and said “What else had you to learn?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0993">“Well, there was Mystery,” the Mock Turtle replied, counting off the subjects on his flappers, “—Mystery, ancient and modern, with Seaography: then Drawling—the Drawling-master was an old conger-eel, that used to come once a week: _he_ taught us Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in Coils.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0994">“What was _that_ like?” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0995">“Well, I can’t show it you myself,” the Mock Turtle said: “I’m too stiff. </span>
      <span id="f0996">And the Gryphon never learnt it.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0997">“Hadn’t time,” said the Gryphon: “I went to the Classics master, though. </span>
      <span id="f0998">He was an old crab, _he_ was.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0999">“I never went to him,” the Mock Turtle said with a sigh: “he taught Laughing and Grief, they used to say.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1000">“So he did, so he did,” said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both creatures hid their faces in their paws.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1001">“And how many hours a day did you do lessons?” said Alice, in a hurry to change the subject.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1002">“Ten hours the first day,” said the Mock Turtle: “nine the next, and so on.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1003">“What a curious plan!” exclaimed Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1004">“That’s the reason they’re called lessons,” the Gryphon remarked: “because they lessen from day to day.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1005">This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a little before she made her next remark. </span>
      <span id="f1006">“Then the eleventh day must have been a holiday?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1007">“Of course it was,” said the Mock Turtle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1008">“And how did you manage on the twelfth?” Alice went on eagerly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1009">“That’s enough about lessons,” the Gryphon interrupted in a very decided tone: “tell her something about the games now.”</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>