<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER X. The Lobster Quadrille</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1010">CHAPTER X. The Lobster Quadrille</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1012">The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1013">He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or two sobs choked his voice. </span>
      <span id="f1014">“Same as if he had a bone in his throat,” said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him in the back. </span>
      <span id="f1015">At last the Mock Turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on again:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1016">“You may not have lived much under the sea—” (“I haven’t,” said Alice)—“and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster—” (Alice began to say “I once tasted—” but checked herself hastily, and said “No, never”) “—so you can have no idea what a delightful thing a Lobster Quadrille is!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1017">“No, indeed,” said Alice. </span>
      <span id="f1018">“What sort of a dance is it?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1019">“Why,” said the Gryphon, “you first form into a line along the sea-shore—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1020">“Two lines!” cried the Mock Turtle. </span>
      <span id="f1021">“Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on; then, when you’ve cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1022">“_That_ generally takes some time,” interrupted the Gryphon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1023">“—you advance twice—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1024">“Each with a lobster as a partner!” cried the Gryphon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1025">“Of course,” the Mock Turtle said: “advance twice, set to partners—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1026">“—change lobsters, and retire in same order,” continued the Gryphon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1027">“Then, you know,” the Mock Turtle went on, “you throw the—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1028">“The lobsters!” shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1029">“—as far out to sea as you can—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1030">“Swim after them!” screamed the Gryphon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1031">“Turn a somersault in the sea!” cried the Mock Turtle, capering wildly about.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1032">“Change lobsters again!” yelled the Gryphon at the top of its voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1033">“Back to land again, and that’s all the first figure,” said the Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very sadly and quietly, and looked at Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1034">“It must be a very pretty dance,” said Alice timidly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1035">“Would you like to see a little of it?” said the Mock Turtle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1036">“Very much indeed,” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1037">“Come, let’s try the first figure!” said the Mock Turtle to the Gryphon. </span>
      <span id="f1038">“We can do without lobsters, you know. </span>
      <span id="f1039">Which shall sing?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1040">“Oh, _you_ sing,” said the Gryphon. </span>
      <span id="f1041">“I’ve forgotten the words.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1042">So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now and then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving their forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly and sadly:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1043">“Will you walk a little faster?” said a whiting to a snail. </span>
      <span id="f1044">“There’s a porpoise close behind us, and he’s treading on my tail. </span>
      <span id="f1045">See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance! </span>
      <span id="f1046">They are waiting on the shingle—will you come and join the dance? </span>
      <span id="f1047">Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, will you join the dance? </span>
      <span id="f1048">Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1049">“You can really have no notion how delightful it will be When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!” But the snail replied “Too far, too far!” and gave a look askance— Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance. </span>
      <span id="f1050">Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance. </span>
      <span id="f1051">Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1052">“What matters it how far we go?” his scaly friend replied. </span>
      <span id="f1053">“There is another shore, you know, upon the other side. </span>
      <span id="f1054">The further off from England the nearer is to France— Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance. </span>
      <span id="f1055">Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, will you join the dance? </span>
      <span id="f1056">Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1057">“Thank you, it’s a very interesting dance to watch,” said Alice, feeling very glad that it was over at last: “and I do so like that curious song about the whiting!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1058">“Oh, as to the whiting,” said the Mock Turtle, “they—you’ve seen them, of course?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1059">“Yes,” said Alice, “I’ve often seen them at dinn—” she checked herself hastily.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1060">“I don’t know where Dinn may be,” said the Mock Turtle, “but if you’ve seen them so often, of course you know what they’re like.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1061">“I believe so,” Alice replied thoughtfully. </span>
      <span id="f1062">“They have their tails in their mouths—and they’re all over crumbs.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1063">“You’re wrong about the crumbs,” said the Mock Turtle: “crumbs would all wash off in the sea. </span>
      <span id="f1064">But they _have_ their tails in their mouths; and the reason is—” here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut his eyes.—“Tell her about the reason and all that,” he said to the Gryphon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1065">“The reason is,” said the Gryphon, “that they _would_ go with the lobsters to the dance. </span>
      <span id="f1066">So they got thrown out to sea. </span>
      <span id="f1067">So they had to fall a long way. </span>
      <span id="f1068">So they got their tails fast in their mouths. </span>
      <span id="f1069">So they couldn’t get them out again. </span>
      <span id="f1070">That’s all.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1071">“Thank you,” said Alice, “it’s very interesting. </span>
      <span id="f1072">I never knew so much about a whiting before.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1073">“I can tell you more than that, if you like,” said the Gryphon. </span>
      <span id="f1074">“Do you know why it’s called a whiting?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1075">“I never thought about it,” said Alice. </span>
      <span id="f1076">“Why?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1077">“_It does the boots and shoes_,” the Gryphon replied very solemnly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1078">Alice was thoroughly puzzled. </span>
      <span id="f1079">“Does the boots and shoes!” she repeated in a wondering tone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1080">“Why, what are _your_ shoes done with?” said the Gryphon. </span>
      <span id="f1081">“I mean, what makes them so shiny?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1082">Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her answer. </span>
      <span id="f1083">“They’re done with blacking, I believe.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1084">“Boots and shoes under the sea,” the Gryphon went on in a deep voice, “are done with a whiting. </span>
      <span id="f1085">Now you know.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1086">“And what are they made of?” Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1087">“Soles and eels, of course,” the Gryphon replied rather impatiently: “any shrimp could have told you that.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1088">“If I’d been the whiting,” said Alice, whose thoughts were still running on the song, “I’d have said to the porpoise, ‘Keep back, please: we don’t want _you_ with us!’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1089">“They were obliged to have him with them,” the Mock Turtle said: “no wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1090">“Wouldn’t it really?” said Alice in a tone of great surprise.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1091">“Of course not,” said the Mock Turtle: “why, if a fish came to _me_, and told me he was going a journey, I should say ‘With what porpoise?’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1092">“Don’t you mean ‘purpose’?” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1093">“I mean what I say,” the Mock Turtle replied in an offended tone. </span>
      <span id="f1094">And the Gryphon added “Come, let’s hear some of _your_ adventures.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1095">“I could tell you my adventures—beginning from this morning,” said Alice a little timidly: “but it’s no use going back to yesterday, because I was a different person then.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1096">“Explain all that,” said the Mock Turtle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1097">“No, no! </span>
      <span id="f1098">The adventures first,” said the Gryphon in an impatient tone: “explanations take such a dreadful time.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1099">So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first saw the White Rabbit. </span>
      <span id="f1100">She was a little nervous about it just at first, the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened their eyes and mouths so _very_ wide, but she gained courage as she went on. </span>
      <span id="f1101">Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part about her repeating “_You are old, Father William_,” to the Caterpillar, and the words all coming different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath, and said “That’s very curious.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1102">“It’s all about as curious as it can be,” said the Gryphon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1103">“It all came different!” the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. </span>
      <span id="f1104">“I should like to hear her try and repeat something now. </span>
      <span id="f1105">Tell her to begin.” He looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of authority over Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1106">“Stand up and repeat ‘’_Tis the voice of the sluggard_,’” said the Gryphon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1107">“How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!” thought Alice; “I might as well be at school at once.” However, she got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the Lobster Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came very queer indeed:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1108">“’Tis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declare, “You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair.” As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1109">[later editions continued as follows When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark, And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark, But, when the tide rises and sharks are around, His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.]</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1110">“That’s different from what _I_ used to say when I was a child,” said the Gryphon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1111">“Well, I never heard it before,” said the Mock Turtle; “but it sounds uncommon nonsense.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1112">Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands, wondering if anything would _ever_ happen in a natural way again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1113">“I should like to have it explained,” said the Mock Turtle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1114">“She can’t explain it,” said the Gryphon hastily. </span>
      <span id="f1115">“Go on with the next verse.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1116">“But about his toes?” the Mock Turtle persisted. </span>
      <span id="f1117">“How _could_ he turn them out with his nose, you know?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1118">“It’s the first position in dancing.” Alice said; but was dreadfully puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the subject.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1119">“Go on with the next verse,” the Gryphon repeated impatiently: “it begins ‘_I passed by his garden_.’”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1120">Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1121">“I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye, How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1122">[later editions continued as follows The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat, While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat. </span>
      <span id="f1123">When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon, Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon: While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl, And concluded the banquet—]</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1124">“What _is_ the use of repeating all that stuff,” the Mock Turtle interrupted, “if you don’t explain it as you go on? </span>
      <span id="f1125">It’s by far the most confusing thing _I_ ever heard!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1126">“Yes, I think you’d better leave off,” said the Gryphon: and Alice was only too glad to do so.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1127">“Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille?” the Gryphon went on. </span>
      <span id="f1128">“Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you a song?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1129">“Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,” Alice replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone, “Hm! </span>
      <span id="f1130">No accounting for tastes! </span>
      <span id="f1131">Sing her ‘_Turtle Soup_,’ will you, old fellow?”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1132">The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes choked with sobs, to sing this:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1133">“Beautiful Soup, so rich and green, Waiting in a hot tureen! </span>
      <span id="f1134">Who for such dainties would not stoop? </span>
      <span id="f1135">Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup! </span>
      <span id="f1136">Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup! </span>
      <span id="f1137">    Beau—ootiful Soo—oop! </span>
      <span id="f1138">    Beau—ootiful Soo—oop! </span>
      <span id="f1139">Soo—oop of the e—e—evening,     Beautiful, beautiful Soup!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1140">“Beautiful Soup! </span>
      <span id="f1141">Who cares for fish, Game, or any other dish? </span>
      <span id="f1142">Who would not give all else for two p ennyworth only of beautiful Soup? </span>
      <span id="f1143">Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup? </span>
      <span id="f1144">    Beau—ootiful Soo—oop! </span>
      <span id="f1145">    Beau—ootiful Soo—oop! </span>
      <span id="f1146">Soo—oop of the e—e—evening,     Beautiful, beauti—FUL SOUP!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1147">“Chorus again!” cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just begun to repeat it, when a cry of “The trial’s beginning!” was heard in the distance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1148">“Come on!” cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand, it hurried off, without waiting for the end of the song.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1149">“What trial is it?” Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon only answered “Come on!” and ran the faster, while more and more faintly came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1150">“Soo—oop of the e—e—evening,     Beautiful, beautiful Soup!”</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>