<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER XII. Alice’s Evidence</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1258">CHAPTER XII. Alice’s Evidence</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1260">“Here!” cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of goldfish she had accidentally upset the week before.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1261">“Oh, I _beg_ your pardon!” she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident of the goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of idea that they must be collected at once and put back into the jury-box, or they would die.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1262">“The trial cannot proceed,” said the King in a very grave voice, “until all the jurymen are back in their proper places—_all_,” he repeated with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he said so.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1263">Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move. </span>
      <span id="f1264">She soon got it out again, and put it right; “not that it signifies much,” she said to herself; “I should think it would be _quite_ as much use in the trial one way up as the other.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1265">As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to them, they set to work very diligently to write out a history of the accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof of the court.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1266">“What do you know about this business?” the King said to Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1267">“Nothing,” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1268">“Nothing _whatever?_” persisted the King.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1269">“Nothing whatever,” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1270">“That’s very important,” the King said, turning to the jury. </span>
      <span id="f1271">They were just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the White Rabbit interrupted: “_Un_important, your Majesty means, of course,” he said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as he spoke.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1272">“_Un_important, of course, I meant,” the King hastily said, and went on to himself in an undertone,</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1273">“important—unimportant—unimportant—important—” as if he were trying which word sounded best.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1274">Some of the jury wrote it down “important,” and some “unimportant.” Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates; “but it doesn’t matter a bit,” she thought to herself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1275">At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing in his note-book, cackled out “Silence!” and read out from his book, “Rule Forty-two. </span>
      <span id="f1276">_All persons more than a mile high to leave the court_.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1277">Everybody looked at Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1278">“_I’m_ not a mile high,” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1279">“You are,” said the King.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1280">“Nearly two miles high,” added the Queen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1281">“Well, I shan’t go, at any rate,” said Alice: “besides, that’s not a regular rule: you invented it just now.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1282">“It’s the oldest rule in the book,” said the King.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1283">“Then it ought to be Number One,” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1284">The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. </span>
      <span id="f1285">“Consider your verdict,” he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1286">“There’s more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty,” said the White Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; “this paper has just been picked up.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1287">“What’s in it?” said the Queen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1288">“I haven’t opened it yet,” said the White Rabbit, “but it seems to be a letter, written by the prisoner to—to somebody.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1289">“It must have been that,” said the King, “unless it was written to nobody, which isn’t usual, you know.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1290">“Who is it directed to?” said one of the jurymen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1291">“It isn’t directed at all,” said the White Rabbit; “in fact, there’s nothing written on the _outside_.” He unfolded the paper as he spoke, and added “It isn’t a letter, after all: it’s a set of verses.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1292">“Are they in the prisoner’s handwriting?” asked another of the jurymen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1293">“No, they’re not,” said the White Rabbit, “and that’s the queerest thing about it.” (The jury all looked puzzled.)</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1294">“He must have imitated somebody else’s hand,” said the King. </span>
      <span id="f1295">(The jury all brightened up again.)</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1296">“Please your Majesty,” said the Knave, “I didn’t write it, and they can’t prove I did: there’s no name signed at the end.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1297">“If you didn’t sign it,” said the King, “that only makes the matter worse. </span>
      <span id="f1298">You _must_ have meant some mischief, or else you’d have signed your name like an honest man.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1299">There was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first really clever thing the King had said that day.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1300">“That _proves_ his guilt,” said the Queen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1301">“It proves nothing of the sort!” said Alice. </span>
      <span id="f1302">“Why, you don’t even know what they’re about!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1303">“Read them,” said the King.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1304">The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. </span>
      <span id="f1305">“Where shall I begin, please your Majesty?” he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1306">“Begin at the beginning,” the King said gravely, “and go on till you come to the end: then stop.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1307">These were the verses the White Rabbit read:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1308">“They told me you had been to her,     And mentioned me to him: She gave me a good character,     But said I could not swim.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1309">He sent them word I had not gone     (We know it to be true): If she should push the matter on,     What would become of you?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1310">I gave her one, they gave him two,     You gave us three or more; They all returned from him to you,     Though they were mine before.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1311">If I or she should chance to be     Involved in this affair, He trusts to you to set them free,     Exactly as we were.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1312">My notion was that you had been     (Before she had this fit) An obstacle that came between     Him, and ourselves, and it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1313">Don’t let him know she liked them best,     For this must ever be A secret, kept from all the rest,     Between yourself and me.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1314">“That’s the most important piece of evidence we’ve heard yet,” said the King, rubbing his hands; “so now let the jury—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1315">“If any one of them can explain it,” said Alice, (she had grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasn’t a bit afraid of interrupting him,) “I’ll give him sixpence. </span>
      <span id="f1316">_I_ don’t believe there’s an atom of meaning in it.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1317">The jury all wrote down on their slates, “_She_ doesn’t believe there’s an atom of meaning in it,” but none of them attempted to explain the paper.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1318">“If there’s no meaning in it,” said the King, “that saves a world of trouble, you know, as we needn’t try to find any. </span>
      <span id="f1319">And yet I don’t know,” he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at them with one eye; “I seem to see some meaning in them, after all. </span>
      <span id="f1320">“—_said I could not swim_—” you can’t swim, can you?” he added, turning to the Knave.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1321">The Knave shook his head sadly. </span>
      <span id="f1322">“Do I look like it?” he said. </span>
      <span id="f1323">(Which he certainly did _not_, being made entirely of cardboard.)</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1324">“All right, so far,” said the King, and he went on muttering over the verses to himself: “‘_We know it to be true_—’ that’s the jury, of course—‘_I gave her one, they gave him two_—’ why, that must be what he did with the tarts, you know—”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1325">“But, it goes on ‘_they all returned from him to you_,’” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1326">“Why, there they are!” said the King triumphantly, pointing to the tarts on the table. </span>
      <span id="f1327">“Nothing can be clearer than _that_. </span>
      <span id="f1328">Then again—‘_before she had this fit_—’ you never had fits, my dear, I think?” he said to the Queen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1329">“Never!” said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the Lizard as she spoke. </span>
      <span id="f1330">(The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on his slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily began again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long as it lasted.)</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1331">“Then the words don’t _fit_ you,” said the King, looking round the court with a smile. </span>
      <span id="f1332">There was a dead silence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1333">“It’s a pun!” the King added in an offended tone, and everybody laughed, “Let the jury consider their verdict,” the King said, for about the twentieth time that day.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1334">“No, no!” said the Queen. </span>
      <span id="f1335">“Sentence first—verdict afterwards.”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1336">“Stuff and nonsense!” said Alice loudly. </span>
      <span id="f1337">“The idea of having the sentence first!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1338">“Hold your tongue!” said the Queen, turning purple.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1339">“I won’t!” said Alice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1340">“Off with her head!” the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. </span>
      <span id="f1341">Nobody moved.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1342">“Who cares for you?” said Alice, (she had grown to her full size by this time.) “You’re nothing but a pack of cards!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1343">At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1344">“Wake up, Alice dear!” said her sister; “Why, what a long sleep you’ve had!”</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1345">“Oh, I’ve had such a curious dream!” said Alice, and she told her sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange Adventures of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she had finished, her sister kissed her, and said, “It _was_ a curious dream, dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it’s getting late.” So Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might, what a wonderful dream it had been.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1346">But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all her wonderful Adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion, and this was her dream:—</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1347">First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the tiny hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were looking up into hers—she could hear the very tones of her voice, and see that queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair that _would_ always get into her eyes—and still as she listened, or seemed to listen, the whole place around her became alive with the strange creatures of her little sister’s dream.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1348">The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried by—the frightened Mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool—she could hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare and his friends shared their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the Queen ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution—once more the pig-baby was sneezing on the Duchess’s knee, while plates and dishes crashed around it—once more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the Lizard’s slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs, filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable Mock Turtle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1349">So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and all would change to dull reality—the grass would be only rustling in the wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds—the rattling teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells, and the Queen’s shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd boy—and the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the Gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change (she knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farm-yard—while the lowing of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock Turtle’s heavy sobs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1350">Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children, and make _their_ eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel with all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys, remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1351">THE END</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>