<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0003">Chapter I. Part 1</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0005">The Nellie, a cruising yawl, swung to her anchor without a flutter of the sails, and was at rest. </span>
      <span id="f0006">The flood had made, the wind was nearly calm, and being bound down the river, the only thing for it was to come to and wait for the turn of the tide.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0007">The sea-reach of the Thames stretched before us like the beginning of an interminable waterway. </span>
      <span id="f0008">In the offing the sea and the sky were welded together without a joint, and in the luminous space the tanned sails of the barges drifting up with the tide seemed to stand still in red clusters of canvas sharply peaked, with gleams of varnished sprits. </span>
      <span id="f0009">A haze rested on the low shores that ran out to sea in vanishing flatness. </span>
      <span id="f0010">The air was dark above Gravesend, and farther back still seemed condensed into a mournful gloom, brooding motionless over the biggest, and the greatest, town on earth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0011">The Director of Companies was our captain and our host. </span>
      <span id="f0012">We four affectionately watched his back as he stood in the bows looking to seaward. </span>
      <span id="f0013">On the whole river there was nothing that looked half so nautical. </span>
      <span id="f0014">He resembled a pilot, which to a seaman is trustworthiness personified. </span>
      <span id="f0015">It was difficult to realize his work was not out there in the luminous estuary, but behind him, within the brooding gloom.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0016">Between us there was, as I have already said somewhere, the bond of the sea. </span>
      <span id="f0017">Besides holding our hearts together through long periods of separation, it had the effect of making us tolerant of each other&#39;s yarns--and even convictions. </span>
      <span id="f0018">The Lawyer--the best of old fellows--had, because of his many years and many virtues, the only cushion on deck, and was lying on the only rug. </span>
      <span id="f0019">The Accountant had brought out already a box of dominoes, and was toying architecturally with the bones. </span>
      <span id="f0020">Marlow sat cross-legged right aft, leaning against the mizzen-mast. </span>
      <span id="f0021">He had sunken cheeks, a yellow complexion, a straight back, an ascetic aspect, and, with his arms dropped, the palms of hands outwards, resembled an idol. </span>
      <span id="f0022">The Director, satisfied the anchor had good hold, made his way aft and sat down amongst us. </span>
      <span id="f0023">We exchanged a few words lazily. </span>
      <span id="f0024">Afterwards there was silence on board the yacht. </span>
      <span id="f0025">For some reason or other we did not begin that game of dominoes. </span>
      <span id="f0026">We felt meditative, and fit for nothing but placid staring. </span>
      <span id="f0027">The day was ending in a serenity of still and exquisite brilliance. </span>
      <span id="f0028">The water shone pacifically; the sky, without a speck, was a benign immensity of unstained light; the very mist on the Essex marshes was like a gauzy and radiant fabric, hung from the wooded rises inland, and draping the low shores in diaphanous folds. </span>
      <span id="f0029">Only the gloom to the west, brooding over the upper reaches, became more somber every minute, as if angered by the approach of the sun.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0030">And at last, in its curved and imperceptible fall, the sun sank low, and from glowing white changed to a dull red without rays and without heat, as if about to go out suddenly, stricken to death by the touch of that gloom brooding over a crowd of men.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0031">Forthwith a change came over the waters, and the serenity became less brilliant but more profound. </span>
      <span id="f0032">The old river in its broad reach rested unruffled at the decline of day, after ages of good service done to the race that peopled its banks, spread out in the tranquil dignity of a waterway leading to the uttermost ends of the earth. </span>
      <span id="f0033">We looked at the venerable stream not in the vivid flush of a short day that comes and departs for ever, but in the august light of abiding memories. </span>
      <span id="f0034">And indeed nothing is easier for a man who has, as the phrase goes, &#34;followed the sea&#34; with reverence and affection, than to evoke the great spirit of the past upon the lower reaches of the Thames. </span>
      <span id="f0035">The tidal current runs to and fro in its unceasing service, crowded with memories of men and ships it had borne to the rest of home or to the battles of the sea. </span>
      <span id="f0036">It had known and served all the men of whom the nation is proud, from Sir Francis Drake to Sir John Franklin, knights all, titled and untitled--the great knights-errant of the sea. </span>
      <span id="f0037">It had borne all the ships whose names are like jewels flashing in the night of time, from the Golden Hind returning with her round flanks full of treasure, to be visited by the Queen&#39;s Highness and thus pass out of the gigantic tale, to the Erebus and Terror, bound on other conquests--and that never returned. </span>
      <span id="f0038">It had known the ships and the men. </span>
      <span id="f0039">They had sailed from Deptford, from Greenwich, from Erith--the adventurers and the settlers; kings&#39; ships and the ships of men on &#39;Change; captains, admirals, the dark &#34;interlopers&#34; of the Eastern trade, and the commissioned &#34;generals&#34; of East India fleets. </span>
      <span id="f0040">Hunters for gold or pursuers of fame, they all had gone out on that stream, bearing the sword, and often the torch, messengers of the might within the land, bearers of a spark from the sacred fire. </span>
      <span id="f0041">What greatness had not floated on the ebb of that river into the mystery of an unknown earth! </span>
      <span id="f0042">. </span>
      <span id="f0043">. </span>
      <span id="f0044">. </span>
      <span id="f0045">The dreams of men, the seed of commonwealths, the germs of empires.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0046">The sun set; the dusk fell on the stream, and lights began to appear along the shore. </span>
      <span id="f0047">The Chapman lighthouse, a three-legged thing erect on a mud-flat, shone strongly. </span>
      <span id="f0048">Lights of ships moved in the fairway--a great stir of lights going up and going down. </span>
      <span id="f0049">And farther west on the upper reaches the place of the monstrous town was still marked ominously on the sky, a brooding gloom in sunshine, a lurid glare under the stars.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0050">&#34;And this also,&#34; said Marlow suddenly, &#34;has been one of the dark places of the earth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0051">He was the only man of us who still &#34;followed the sea.&#34; The worst that could be said of him was that he did not represent his class. </span>
      <span id="f0052">He was a seaman, but he was a wanderer, too, while most seamen lead, if one may so express it, a sedentary life. </span>
      <span id="f0053">Their minds are of the stay-at-home order, and their home is always with them--the ship; and so is their country--the sea. </span>
      <span id="f0054">One ship is very much like another, and the sea is always the same. </span>
      <span id="f0055">In the immutability of their surroundings the foreign shores, the foreign faces, the changing immensity of life, glide past, veiled not by a sense of mystery but by a slightly disdainful ignorance; for there is nothing mysterious to a seaman unless it be the sea itself, which is the mistress of his existence and as inscrutable as Destiny. </span>
      <span id="f0056">For the rest, after his hours of work, a casual stroll or a casual spree on shore suffices to unfold for him the secret of a whole continent, and generally he finds the secret not worth knowing. </span>
      <span id="f0057">The yarns of seamen have a direct simplicity, the whole meaning of which lies within the shell of a cracked nut. </span>
      <span id="f0058">But Marlow was not typical (if his propensity to spin yarns be excepted), and to him the meaning of an episode was not inside like a kernel but outside, enveloping the tale which brought it out only as a glow brings out a haze, in the likeness of one of these misty halos that sometimes are made visible by the spectral illumination of moonshine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0059">His remark did not seem at all surprising. </span>
      <span id="f0060">It was just like Marlow. </span>
      <span id="f0061">It was accepted in silence. </span>
      <span id="f0062">No one took the trouble to grunt even; and presently he said, very slow--</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0063">&#34;I was thinking of very old times, when the Romans first came here, nineteen hundred years ago--the other day. </span>
      <span id="f0064">. </span>
      <span id="f0065">. </span>
      <span id="f0066">. </span>
      <span id="f0067">Light came out of this river since--you say Knights? </span>
      <span id="f0068">Yes; but it is like a running blaze on a plain, like a flash of lightning in the clouds. </span>
      <span id="f0069">We live in the flicker--may it last as long as the old earth keeps rolling! </span>
      <span id="f0070">But darkness was here yesterday. </span>
      <span id="f0071">Imagine the feelings of a commander of a fine--what d&#39;ye call &#39;em?--trireme in the Mediterranean, ordered suddenly to the north; run overland across the Gauls in a hurry; put in charge of one of these craft the legionaries,--a wonderful lot of handy men they must have been too--used to build, apparently by the hundred, in a month or two, if we may believe what we read. </span>
      <span id="f0072">Imagine him here--the very end of the world, a sea the color of lead, a sky the color of smoke, a kind of ship about as rigid as a concertina--and going up this river with stores, or orders, or what you like. </span>
      <span id="f0073">Sandbanks, marshes, forests, savages,--precious little to eat fit for a civilized man, nothing but Thames water to drink. </span>
      <span id="f0074">No Falernian wine here, no going ashore. </span>
      <span id="f0075">Here and there a military camp lost in a wilderness, like a needle in a bundle of hay--cold, fog, tempests, disease, exile, and death,--death skulking in the air, in the water, in the bush. </span>
      <span id="f0076">They must have been dying like flies here. </span>
      <span id="f0077">Oh yes--he did it. </span>
      <span id="f0078">Did it very well, too, no doubt, and without thinking much about it either, except afterwards to brag of what he had gone through in his time, perhaps. </span>
      <span id="f0079">They were men enough to face the darkness. </span>
      <span id="f0080">And perhaps he was cheered by keeping his eye on a chance of promotion to the fleet at Ravenna by-and-by, if he had good friends in Rome and survived the awful climate. </span>
      <span id="f0081">Or think of a decent young citizen in a toga--perhaps too much dice, you know--coming out here in the train of some prefect, or tax-gatherer, or trader even, to mend his fortunes. </span>
      <span id="f0082">Land in a swamp, march through the woods, and in some inland post feel the savagery, the utter savagery, had closed round him,--all that mysterious life of the wilderness that stirs in the forest, in the jungles, in the hearts of wild men. </span>
      <span id="f0083">There&#39;s no initiation either into such mysteries. </span>
      <span id="f0084">He has to live in the midst of the incomprehensible, which is also detestable. </span>
      <span id="f0085">And it has a fascination, too, that goes to work upon him. </span>
      <span id="f0086">The fascination of the abomination--you know. </span>
      <span id="f0087">Imagine the growing regrets, the longing to escape, the powerless disgust, the surrender, the hate.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0088">He paused.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0089">&#34;Mind,&#34; he began again, lifting one arm from the elbow, the palm of the hand outwards, so that, with his legs folded before him, he had the pose of a Buddha preaching in European clothes and without a lotus-flower--&#34;Mind, none of us would feel exactly like this. </span>
      <span id="f0090">What saves us is efficiency--the devotion to efficiency. </span>
      <span id="f0091">But these chaps were not much account, really. </span>
      <span id="f0092">They were no colonists; their administration was merely a squeeze, and nothing more, I suspect. </span>
      <span id="f0093">They were conquerors, and for that you want only brute force--nothing to boast of, when you have it, since your strength is just an accident arising from the weakness of others. </span>
      <span id="f0094">They grabbed what they could get for the sake of what was to be got. </span>
      <span id="f0095">It was just robbery with violence, aggravated murder on a great scale, and men going at it blind--as is very proper for those who tackle a darkness. </span>
      <span id="f0096">The conquest of the earth, which mostly means the taking it away from those who have a different complexion or slightly flatter noses than ourselves, is not a pretty thing when you look into it too much. </span>
      <span id="f0097">What redeems it is the idea only. </span>
      <span id="f0098">An idea at the back of it; not a sentimental pretense but an idea; and an unselfish belief in the idea--something you can set up, and bow down before, and offer a sacrifice to. </span>
      <span id="f0099">. </span>
      <span id="f0100">. </span>
      <span id="f0101">.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0102">He broke off. </span>
      <span id="f0103">Flames glided in the river, small green flames, red flames, white flames, pursuing, overtaking, joining, crossing each other--then separating slowly or hastily. </span>
      <span id="f0104">The traffic of the great city went on in the deepening night upon the sleepless river. </span>
      <span id="f0105">We looked on, waiting patiently--there was nothing else to do till the end of the flood; but it was only after a long silence, when he said, in a hesitating voice, &#34;I suppose you fellows remember I did once turn fresh-water sailor for a bit,&#34; that we knew we were fated, before the ebb began to run, to hear about one of Marlow&#39;s inconclusive experiences.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0106">&#34;I don&#39;t want to bother you much with what happened to me personally,&#34; he began, showing in this remark the weakness of many tellers of tales who seem so often unaware of what their audience would best like to hear; &#34;yet to understand the effect of it on me you ought to know how I got out there, what I saw, how I went up that river to the place where I first met the poor chap. </span>
      <span id="f0107">It was the farthest point of navigation and the culminating point of my experience. </span>
      <span id="f0108">It seemed somehow to throw a kind of light on everything about me--and into my thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f0109">It was somber enough too--and pitiful--not extraordinary in any way--not very clear either. </span>
      <span id="f0110">No, not very clear. </span>
      <span id="f0111">And yet it seemed to throw a kind of light.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0112">&#34;I had then, as you remember, just returned to London after a lot of Indian Ocean, Pacific, China Seas--a regular dose of the East--six years or so, and I was loafing about, hindering you fellows in your work and invading your homes, just as though I had got a heavenly mission to civilize you. </span>
      <span id="f0113">It was very fine for a time, but after a bit I did get tired of resting. </span>
      <span id="f0114">Then I began to look for a ship--I should think the hardest work on earth. </span>
      <span id="f0115">But the ships wouldn&#39;t even look at me. </span>
      <span id="f0116">And I got tired of that game too.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0117">&#34;Now when I was a little chap I had a passion for maps. </span>
      <span id="f0118">I would look for hours at South America, or Africa, or Australia, and lose myself in all the glories of exploration. </span>
      <span id="f0119">At that time there were many blank spaces on the earth, and when I saw one that looked particularly inviting on a map (but they all look that) I would put my finger on it and say, &#39;When I grow up I will go there.&#39; The North Pole was one of these places, I remember. </span>
      <span id="f0120">Well, I haven&#39;t been there yet, and shall not try now. </span>
      <span id="f0121">The glamour&#39;s off. </span>
      <span id="f0122">Other places were scattered about the Equator, and in every sort of latitude all over the two hemispheres. </span>
      <span id="f0123">I have been in some of them, and . </span>
      <span id="f0124">. </span>
      <span id="f0125">. </span>
      <span id="f0126">well, we won&#39;t talk about that. </span>
      <span id="f0127">But there was one yet--the biggest, the most blank, so to speak--that I had a hankering after.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0128">&#34;True, by this time it was not a blank space any more. </span>
      <span id="f0129">It had got filled since my boyhood with rivers and lakes and names. </span>
      <span id="f0130">It had ceased to be a blank space of delightful mystery--a white patch for a boy to dream gloriously over. </span>
      <span id="f0131">It had become a place of darkness. </span>
      <span id="f0132">But there was in it one river especially, a mighty big river, that you could see on the map, resembling an immense snake uncoiled, with its head in the sea, its body at rest curving afar over a vast country, and its tail lost in the depths of the land. </span>
      <span id="f0133">And as I looked at the map of it in a shop-window, it fascinated me as a snake would a bird--a silly little bird. </span>
      <span id="f0134">Then I remembered there was a big concern, a Company for trade on that river. </span>
      <span id="f0135">Dash it all! </span>
      <span id="f0136">I thought to myself, they can&#39;t trade without using some kind of craft on that lot of fresh water--steamboats! </span>
      <span id="f0137">Why shouldn&#39;t I try to get charge of one? </span>
      <span id="f0138">I went on along Fleet Street, but could not shake off the idea. </span>
      <span id="f0139">The snake had charmed me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0140">&#34;You understand it was a Continental concern, that Trading society; but I have a lot of relations living on the Continent, because it&#39;s cheap and not so nasty as it looks, they say.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0141">&#34;I am sorry to own I began to worry them. </span>
      <span id="f0142">This was already a fresh departure for me. </span>
      <span id="f0143">I was not used to get things that way, you know. </span>
      <span id="f0144">I always went my own road and on my own legs where I had a mind to go. </span>
      <span id="f0145">I wouldn&#39;t have believed it of myself; but, then--you see--I felt somehow I must get there by hook or by crook. </span>
      <span id="f0146">So I worried them. </span>
      <span id="f0147">The men said &#39;My dear fellow,&#39; and did nothing. </span>
      <span id="f0148">Then--would you believe it?--I tried the women. </span>
      <span id="f0149">I, Charlie Marlow, set the women to work--to get a job. </span>
      <span id="f0150">Heavens! </span>
      <span id="f0151">Well, you see, the notion drove me. </span>
      <span id="f0152">I had an aunt, a dear enthusiastic soul. </span>
      <span id="f0153">She wrote: &#39;It will be delightful. </span>
      <span id="f0154">I am ready to do anything, anything for you. </span>
      <span id="f0155">It is a glorious idea. </span>
      <span id="f0156">I know the wife of a very high personage in the Administration, and also a man who has lots of influence with,&#39; &amp;c., &amp;c. </span>
      <span id="f0157">She was determined to make no end of fuss to get me appointed skipper of a river steamboat, if such was my fancy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0158">&#34;I got my appointment--of course; and I got it very quick. </span>
      <span id="f0159">It appears the Company had received news that one of their captains had been killed in a scuffle with the natives. </span>
      <span id="f0160">This was my chance, and it made me the more anxious to go. </span>
      <span id="f0161">It was only months and months afterwards, when I made the attempt to recover what was left of the body, that I heard the original quarrel arose from a misunderstanding about some hens. </span>
      <span id="f0162">Yes, two black hens. </span>
      <span id="f0163">Fresleven--that was the fellow&#39;s name, a Dane--thought himself wronged somehow in the bargain, so he went ashore and started to hammer the chief of the village with a stick. </span>
      <span id="f0164">Oh, it didn&#39;t surprise me in the least to hear this, and at the same time to be told that Fresleven was the gentlest, quietest creature that ever walked on two legs. </span>
      <span id="f0165">No doubt he was; but he had been a couple of years already out there engaged in the noble cause, you know, and he probably felt the need at last of asserting his self-respect in some way. </span>
      <span id="f0166">Therefore he whacked the old nigger mercilessly, while a big crowd of his people watched him, thunderstruck, till some man,--I was told the chief&#39;s son,--in desperation at hearing the old chap yell, made a tentative jab with a spear at the white man--and of course it went quite easy between the shoulder-blades. </span>
      <span id="f0167">Then the whole population cleared into the forest, expecting all kinds of calamities to happen, while, on the other hand, the steamer Fresleven commanded left also in a bad panic, in charge of the engineer, I believe. </span>
      <span id="f0168">Afterwards nobody seemed to trouble much about Fresleven&#39;s remains, till I got out and stepped into his shoes. </span>
      <span id="f0169">I couldn&#39;t let it rest, though; but when an opportunity offered at last to meet my predecessor, the grass growing through his ribs was tall enough to hide his bones. </span>
      <span id="f0170">They were all there. </span>
      <span id="f0171">The supernatural being had not been touched after he fell. </span>
      <span id="f0172">And the village was deserted, the huts gaped black, rotting, all askew within the fallen enclosures. </span>
      <span id="f0173">A calamity had come to it, sure enough. </span>
      <span id="f0174">The people had vanished. </span>
      <span id="f0175">Mad terror had scattered them, men, women, and children, through the bush, and they had never returned. </span>
      <span id="f0176">What became of the hens I don&#39;t know either. </span>
      <span id="f0177">I should think the cause of progress got them, anyhow. </span>
      <span id="f0178">However, through this glorious affair I got my appointment, before I had fairly begun to hope for it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0179">&#34;I flew around like mad to get ready, and before forty-eight hours I was crossing the Channel to show myself to my employers, and sign the contract. </span>
      <span id="f0180">In a very few hours I arrived in a city that always makes me think of a whited sepulcher. </span>
      <span id="f0181">Prejudice no doubt. </span>
      <span id="f0182">I had no difficulty in finding the Company&#39;s offices. </span>
      <span id="f0183">It was the biggest thing in the town, and everybody I met was full of it. </span>
      <span id="f0184">They were going to run an over-sea empire, and make no end of coin by trade.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0185">&#34;A narrow and deserted street in deep shadow, high houses, innumerable windows with venetian blinds, a dead silence, grass sprouting between the stones, imposing carriage archways right and left, immense double doors standing ponderously ajar. </span>
      <span id="f0186">I slipped through one of these cracks, went up a swept and ungarnished staircase, as arid as a desert, and opened the first door I came to. </span>
      <span id="f0187">Two women, one fat and the other slim, sat on straw-bottomed chairs, knitting black wool. </span>
      <span id="f0188">The slim one got up and walked straight at me--still knitting with downcast eyes--and only just as I began to think of getting out of her way, as you would for a somnambulist, stood still, and looked up. </span>
      <span id="f0189">Her dress was as plain as an umbrella-cover, and she turned round without a word and preceded me into a waiting-room. </span>
      <span id="f0190">I gave my name, and looked about. </span>
      <span id="f0191">Deal table in the middle, plain chairs all round the walls, on one end a large shining map, marked with all the colors of a rainbow. </span>
      <span id="f0192">There was a vast amount of red--good to see at any time, because one knows that some real work is done in there, a deuce of a lot of blue, a little green, smears of orange, and, on the East Coast, a purple patch, to show where the jolly pioneers of progress drink the jolly lager-beer. </span>
      <span id="f0193">However, I wasn&#39;t going into any of these. </span>
      <span id="f0194">I was going into the yellow. </span>
      <span id="f0195">Dead in the center. </span>
      <span id="f0196">And the river was there--fascinating--deadly--like a snake. </span>
      <span id="f0197">Ough! </span>
      <span id="f0198">A door opened, a white-haired secretarial head, but wearing a compassionate expression, appeared, and a skinny forefinger beckoned me into the sanctuary. </span>
      <span id="f0199">Its light was dim, and a heavy writing-desk squatted in the middle. </span>
      <span id="f0200">From behind that structure came out an impression of pale plumpness in a frock-coat. </span>
      <span id="f0201">The great man himself. </span>
      <span id="f0202">He was five feet six, I should judge, and had his grip on the handle-end of ever so many millions. </span>
      <span id="f0203">He shook hands, I fancy, murmured vaguely, was satisfied with my French. </span>
      <span id="f0204">Bon voyage.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0205">&#34;In about forty-five seconds I found myself again in the waiting-room with the compassionate secretary, who, full of desolation and sympathy, made me sign some document. </span>
      <span id="f0206">I believe I undertook amongst other things not to disclose any trade secrets. </span>
      <span id="f0207">Well, I am not going to.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0208">&#34;I began to feel slightly uneasy. </span>
      <span id="f0209">You know I am not used to such ceremonies, and there was something ominous in the atmosphere. </span>
      <span id="f0210">It was just as though I had been let into some conspiracy--I don&#39;t know--something not quite right; and I was glad to get out. </span>
      <span id="f0211">In the outer room the two women knitted black wool feverishly. </span>
      <span id="f0212">People were arriving, and the younger one was walking back and forth introducing them. </span>
      <span id="f0213">The old one sat on her chair. </span>
      <span id="f0214">Her flat cloth slippers were propped up on a foot-warmer, and a cat reposed on her lap. </span>
      <span id="f0215">She wore a starched white affair on her head, had a wart on one cheek, and silver-rimmed spectacles hung on the tip of her nose. </span>
      <span id="f0216">She glanced at me above the glasses. </span>
      <span id="f0217">The swift and indifferent placidity of that look troubled me. </span>
      <span id="f0218">Two youths with foolish and cheery countenances were being piloted over, and she threw at them the same quick glance of unconcerned wisdom. </span>
      <span id="f0219">She seemed to know all about them and about me too. </span>
      <span id="f0220">An eerie feeling came over me. </span>
      <span id="f0221">She seemed uncanny and fateful. </span>
      <span id="f0222">Often far away there I thought of these two, guarding the door of Darkness, knitting black wool as for a warm pall, one introducing, introducing continuously to the unknown, the other scrutinizing the cheery and foolish faces with unconcerned old eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0223">Ave! </span>
      <span id="f0224">Old knitter of black wool. </span>
      <span id="f0225">Morituri te salutant. </span>
      <span id="f0226">Not many of those she looked at ever saw her again--not half, by a long way.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0227">&#34;There was yet a visit to the doctor. </span>
      <span id="f0228">&#39;A simple formality,&#39; assured me the secretary, with an air of taking an immense part in all my sorrows. </span>
      <span id="f0229">Accordingly a young chap wearing his hat over the left eyebrow, some clerk I suppose,--there must have been clerks in the business, though the house was as still as a house in a city of the dead,--came from somewhere up-stairs, and led me forth. </span>
      <span id="f0230">He was shabby and careless, with ink-stains on the sleeves of his jacket, and his cravat was large and billowy, under a chin shaped like the toe of an old boot. </span>
      <span id="f0231">It was a little too early for the doctor, so I proposed a drink, and thereupon he developed a vein of joviality. </span>
      <span id="f0232">As we sat over our vermouths he glorified the Company&#39;s business, and by-and-by I expressed casually my surprise at him not going out there. </span>
      <span id="f0233">He became very cool and collected all at once. </span>
      <span id="f0234">&#39;I am not such a fool as I look, quoth Plato to his disciples,&#39; he said sententiously, emptied his glass with great resolution, and we rose.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0235">&#34;The old doctor felt my pulse, evidently thinking of something else the while. </span>
      <span id="f0236">&#39;Good, good for there,&#39; he mumbled, and then with a certain eagerness asked me whether I would let him measure my head. </span>
      <span id="f0237">Rather surprised, I said Yes, when he produced a thing like calipers and got the dimensions back and front and every way, taking notes carefully. </span>
      <span id="f0238">He was an unshaven little man in a threadbare coat like a gaberdine, with his feet in slippers, and I thought him a harmless fool. </span>
      <span id="f0239">&#39;I always ask leave, in the interests of science, to measure the crania of those going out there,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f0240">&#39;And when they come back, too?&#39; I asked. </span>
      <span id="f0241">&#39;Oh, I never see them,&#39; he remarked; &#39;and, moreover, the changes take place inside, you know.&#39; He smiled, as if at some quiet joke. </span>
      <span id="f0242">&#39;So you are going out there. </span>
      <span id="f0243">Famous. </span>
      <span id="f0244">Interesting too.&#39; He gave me a searching glance, and made another note. </span>
      <span id="f0245">&#39;Ever any madness in your family?&#39; he asked, in a matter-of-fact tone. </span>
      <span id="f0246">I felt very annoyed. </span>
      <span id="f0247">&#39;Is that question in the interests of science too?&#39; &#39;It would be,&#39; he said, without taking notice of my irritation, &#39;interesting for science to watch the mental changes of individuals, on the spot, but . </span>
      <span id="f0248">. </span>
      <span id="f0249">.&#39; &#39;Are you an alienist?&#39; I interrupted. </span>
      <span id="f0250">&#39;Every doctor should be--a little,&#39; answered that original, imperturbably. </span>
      <span id="f0251">&#39;I have a little theory which you Messieurs who go out there must help me to prove. </span>
      <span id="f0252">This is my share in the advantages my country shall reap from the possession of such a magnificent dependency. </span>
      <span id="f0253">The mere wealth I leave to others. </span>
      <span id="f0254">Pardon my questions, but you are the first Englishman coming under my observation. </span>
      <span id="f0255">. </span>
      <span id="f0256">. </span>
      <span id="f0257">.&#39; I hastened to assure him I was not in the least typical. </span>
      <span id="f0258">&#39;If I were,&#39; said I, &#39;I wouldn&#39;t be talking like this with you.&#39; &#39;What you say is rather profound, and probably erroneous,&#39; he said, with a laugh. </span>
      <span id="f0259">&#39;Avoid irritation more than exposure to the sun. </span>
      <span id="f0260">Adieu. </span>
      <span id="f0261">How do you English say, eh? </span>
      <span id="f0262">Good-by. </span>
      <span id="f0263">Ah! </span>
      <span id="f0264">Good-by. </span>
      <span id="f0265">Adieu. </span>
      <span id="f0266">In the tropics one must before everything keep calm.&#39; . </span>
      <span id="f0267">. </span>
      <span id="f0268">. </span>
      <span id="f0269">He lifted a warning forefinger. </span>
      <span id="f0270">. </span>
      <span id="f0271">. </span>
      <span id="f0272">. </span>
      <span id="f0273">&#39;Du calme, du calme. </span>
      <span id="f0274">Adieu.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0275">&#34;One thing more remained to do--say good-by to my excellent aunt. </span>
      <span id="f0276">I found her triumphant. </span>
      <span id="f0277">I had a cup of tea--the last decent cup of tea for many days--and in a room that most soothingly looked just as you would expect a lady&#39;s drawing-room to look, we had a long quiet chat by the fireside. </span>
      <span id="f0278">In the course of these confidences it became quite plain to me I had been represented to the wife of the high dignitary, and goodness knows to how many more people besides, as an exceptional and gifted creature--a piece of good fortune for the Company--a man you don&#39;t get hold of every day. </span>
      <span id="f0279">Good heavens! </span>
      <span id="f0280">and I was going to take charge of a two-penny-halfpenny river-steamboat with a penny whistle attached! </span>
      <span id="f0281">It appeared, however, I was also one of the Workers, with a capital--you know. </span>
      <span id="f0282">Something like an emissary of light, something like a lower sort of apostle. </span>
      <span id="f0283">There had been a lot of such rot let loose in print and talk just about that time, and the excellent woman, living right in the rush of all that humbug, got carried off her feet. </span>
      <span id="f0284">She talked about &#39;weaning those ignorant millions from their horrid ways,&#39; till, upon my word, she made me quite uncomfortable. </span>
      <span id="f0285">I ventured to hint that the Company was run for profit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0286">&#34;&#39;You forget, dear Charlie, that the laborer is worthy of his hire,&#39; she said, brightly. </span>
      <span id="f0287">It&#39;s queer how out of touch with truth women are. </span>
      <span id="f0288">They live in a world of their own, and there had never been anything like it, and never can be. </span>
      <span id="f0289">It is too beautiful altogether, and if they were to set it up it would go to pieces before the first sunset. </span>
      <span id="f0290">Some confounded fact we men have been living contentedly with ever since the day of creation would start up and knock the whole thing over.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0291">&#34;After this I got embraced, told to wear flannel, be sure to write often, and so on--and I left. </span>
      <span id="f0292">In the street--I don&#39;t know why--a queer feeling came to me that I was an impostor. </span>
      <span id="f0293">Odd thing that I, who used to clear out for any part of the world at twenty-four hours&#39; notice, with less thought than most men give to the crossing of a street, had a moment--I won&#39;t say of hesitation, but of startled pause, before this commonplace affair. </span>
      <span id="f0294">The best way I can explain it to you is by saying that, for a second or two, I felt as though, instead of going to the center of a continent, I were about to set off for the center of the earth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0295">&#34;I left in a French steamer, and she called in every blamed port they have out there, for, as far as I could see, the sole purpose of landing soldiers and custom-house officers. </span>
      <span id="f0296">I watched the coast. </span>
      <span id="f0297">Watching a coast as it slips by the ship is like thinking about an enigma. </span>
      <span id="f0298">There it is before you--smiling, frowning, inviting, grand, mean, insipid, or savage, and always mute with an air of whispering, &#39;Come and find out.&#39; This one was almost featureless, as if still in the making, with an aspect of monotonous grimness. </span>
      <span id="f0299">The edge of a colossal jungle, so dark-green as to be almost black, fringed with white surf, ran straight, like a ruled line, far, far away along a blue sea whose glitter was blurred by a creeping mist. </span>
      <span id="f0300">The sun was fierce, the land seemed to glisten and drip with steam. </span>
      <span id="f0301">Here and there grayish-whitish specks showed up, clustered inside the white surf, with a flag flying above them perhaps. </span>
      <span id="f0302">Settlements some centuries old, and still no bigger than pin-heads on the untouched expanse of their background. </span>
      <span id="f0303">We pounded along, stopped, landed soldiers; went on, landed custom-house clerks to levy toll in what looked like a God-forsaken wilderness, with a tin shed and a flag-pole lost in it; landed more soldiers--to take care of the custom-house clerks, presumably. </span>
      <span id="f0304">Some, I heard, got drowned in the surf; but whether they did or not, nobody seemed particularly to care. </span>
      <span id="f0305">They were just flung out there, and on we went. </span>
      <span id="f0306">Every day the coast looked the same, as though we had not moved; but we passed various places--trading places--with names like Gran&#39; Bassam Little Popo, names that seemed to belong to some sordid farce acted in front of a sinister backcloth. </span>
      <span id="f0307">The idleness of a passenger, my isolation amongst all these men with whom I had no point of contact, the oily and languid sea, the uniform somberness of the coast, seemed to keep me away from the truth of things, within the toil of a mournful and senseless delusion. </span>
      <span id="f0308">The voice of the surf heard now and then was a positive pleasure, like the speech of a brother. </span>
      <span id="f0309">It was something natural, that had its reason, that had a meaning. </span>
      <span id="f0310">Now and then a boat from the shore gave one a momentary contact with reality. </span>
      <span id="f0311">It was paddled by black fellows. </span>
      <span id="f0312">You could see from afar the white of their eyeballs glistening. </span>
      <span id="f0313">They shouted, sang; their bodies streamed with perspiration; they had faces like grotesque masks--these chaps; but they had bone, muscle, a wild vitality, an intense energy of movement, that was as natural and true as the surf along their coast. </span>
      <span id="f0314">They wanted no excuse for being there. </span>
      <span id="f0315">They were a great comfort to look at. </span>
      <span id="f0316">For a time I would feel I belonged still to a world of straightforward facts; but the feeling would not last long. </span>
      <span id="f0317">Something would turn up to scare it away. </span>
      <span id="f0318">Once, I remember, we came upon a man-of-war anchored off the coast. </span>
      <span id="f0319">There wasn&#39;t even a shed there, and she was shelling the bush. </span>
      <span id="f0320">It appears the French had one of their wars going on thereabouts. </span>
      <span id="f0321">Her ensign dropped limp like a rag; the muzzles of the long eight-inch guns stuck out all over the low hull; the greasy, slimy swell swung her up lazily and let her down, swaying her thin masts. </span>
      <span id="f0322">In the empty immensity of earth, sky, and water, there she was, incomprehensible, firing into a continent. </span>
      <span id="f0323">Pop, would go one of the eight-inch guns; a small flame would dart and vanish, a little white smoke would disappear, a tiny projectile would give a feeble screech--and nothing happened. </span>
      <span id="f0324">Nothing could happen. </span>
      <span id="f0325">There was a touch of insanity in the proceeding, a sense of lugubrious drollery in the sight; and it was not dissipated by somebody on board assuring me earnestly there was a camp of natives--he called them enemies!--hidden out of sight somewhere.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0326">&#34;We gave her her letters (I heard the men in that lonely ship were dying of fever at the rate of three a day) and went on. </span>
      <span id="f0327">We called at some more places with farcical names, where the merry dance of death and trade goes on in a still and earthy atmosphere as of an overheated catacomb; all along the formless coast bordered by dangerous surf, as if Nature herself had tried to ward off intruders; in and out of rivers, streams of death in life, whose banks were rotting into mud, whose waters, thickened into slime, invaded the contorted mangroves, that seemed to writhe at us in the extremity of an impotent despair. </span>
      <span id="f0328">Nowhere did we stop long enough to get a particularized impression, but the general sense of vague and oppressive wonder grew upon me. </span>
      <span id="f0329">It was like a weary pilgrimage amongst hints for nightmares.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0330">&#34;It was upward of thirty days before I saw the mouth of the big river. </span>
      <span id="f0331">We anchored off the seat of the government. </span>
      <span id="f0332">But my work would not begin till some two hundred miles farther on. </span>
      <span id="f0333">So as soon as I could I made a start for a place thirty miles higher up.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0334">&#34;I had my passage on a little sea-going steamer. </span>
      <span id="f0335">Her captain was a Swede, and knowing me for a seaman, invited me on the bridge. </span>
      <span id="f0336">He was a young man, lean, fair, and morose, with lanky hair and a shuffling gait. </span>
      <span id="f0337">As we left the miserable little wharf, he tossed his head contemptuously at the shore. </span>
      <span id="f0338">&#39;Been living there?&#39; he asked. </span>
      <span id="f0339">I said, &#39;Yes.&#39; &#39;Fine lot these government chaps--are they not?&#39; he went on, speaking English with great precision and considerable bitterness. </span>
      <span id="f0340">&#39;It is funny what some people will do for a few francs a month. </span>
      <span id="f0341">I wonder what becomes of that kind when it goes up country?&#39; I said to him I expected to see that soon. </span>
      <span id="f0342">&#39;So-o-o!&#39; he exclaimed. </span>
      <span id="f0343">He shuffled athwart, keeping one eye ahead vigilantly. </span>
      <span id="f0344">&#39;Don&#39;t be too sure,&#39; he continued. </span>
      <span id="f0345">&#39;The other day I took up a man who hanged himself on the road. </span>
      <span id="f0346">He was a Swede, too.&#39; &#39;Hanged himself! </span>
      <span id="f0347">Why, in God&#39;s name?&#39; I cried. </span>
      <span id="f0348">He kept on looking out watchfully. </span>
      <span id="f0349">&#39;Who knows? </span>
      <span id="f0350">The sun too much for him, or the country perhaps.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0351">&#34;At last we opened a reach. </span>
      <span id="f0352">A rocky cliff appeared, mounds of turned-up earth by the shore, houses on a hill, others, with iron roofs, amongst a waste of excavations, or hanging to the declivity. </span>
      <span id="f0353">A continuous noise of the rapids above hovered over this scene of inhabited devastation. </span>
      <span id="f0354">A lot of people, mostly black and naked, moved about like ants. </span>
      <span id="f0355">A jetty projected into the river. </span>
      <span id="f0356">A blinding sunlight drowned all this at times in a sudden recrudescence of glare. </span>
      <span id="f0357">&#39;There&#39;s your Company&#39;s station,&#39; said the Swede, pointing to three wooden barrack-like structures on the rocky slope. </span>
      <span id="f0358">&#39;I will send your things up. </span>
      <span id="f0359">Four boxes did you say? </span>
      <span id="f0360">So. </span>
      <span id="f0361">Farewell.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0362">&#34;I came upon a boiler wallowing in the grass, then found a path leading up the hill. </span>
      <span id="f0363">It turned aside for the bowlders, and also for an undersized railway-truck lying there on its back with its wheels in the air. </span>
      <span id="f0364">One was off. </span>
      <span id="f0365">The thing looked as dead as the carcass of some animal. </span>
      <span id="f0366">I came upon more pieces of decaying machinery, a stack of rusty rails. </span>
      <span id="f0367">To the left a clump of trees made a shady spot, where dark things seemed to stir feebly. </span>
      <span id="f0368">I blinked, the path was steep. </span>
      <span id="f0369">A horn tooted to the right, and I saw the black people run. </span>
      <span id="f0370">A heavy and dull detonation shook the ground, a puff of smoke came out of the cliff, and that was all. </span>
      <span id="f0371">No change appeared on the face of the rock. </span>
      <span id="f0372">They were building a railway. </span>
      <span id="f0373">The cliff was not in the way or anything; but this objectless blasting was all the work going on.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0374">&#34;A slight clinking behind me made me turn my head. </span>
      <span id="f0375">Six black men advanced in a file, toiling up the path. </span>
      <span id="f0376">They walked erect and slow, balancing small baskets full of earth on their heads, and the clink kept time with their footsteps. </span>
      <span id="f0377">Black rags were wound round their loins, and the short ends behind wagged to and fro like tails. </span>
      <span id="f0378">I could see every rib, the joints of their limbs were like knots in a rope; each had an iron collar on his neck, and all were connected together with a chain whose bights swung between them, rhythmically clinking. </span>
      <span id="f0379">Another report from the cliff made me think suddenly of that ship of war I had seen firing into a continent. </span>
      <span id="f0380">It was the same kind of ominous voice; but these men could by no stretch of imagination be called enemies. </span>
      <span id="f0381">They were called criminals, and the outraged law, like the bursting shells, had come to them, an insoluble mystery from over the sea. </span>
      <span id="f0382">All their meager breasts panted together, the violently dilated nostrils quivered, the eyes stared stonily uphill. </span>
      <span id="f0383">They passed me within six inches, without a glance, with that complete, deathlike indifference of unhappy savages. </span>
      <span id="f0384">Behind this raw matter one of the reclaimed, the product of the new forces at work, strolled despondently, carrying a rifle by its middle. </span>
      <span id="f0385">He had a uniform jacket with one button off, and seeing a white man on the path, hoisted his weapon to his shoulder with alacrity. </span>
      <span id="f0386">This was simple prudence, white men being so much alike at a distance that he could not tell who I might be. </span>
      <span id="f0387">He was speedily reassured, and with a large, white, rascally grin, and a glance at his charge, seemed to take me into partnership in his exalted trust. </span>
      <span id="f0388">After all, I also was a part of the great cause of these high and just proceedings.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0389">&#34;Instead of going up, I turned and descended to the left. </span>
      <span id="f0390">My idea was to let that chain-gang get out of sight before I climbed the hill. </span>
      <span id="f0391">You know I am not particularly tender; I&#39;ve had to strike and to fend off. </span>
      <span id="f0392">I&#39;ve had to resist and to attack sometimes--that&#39;s only one way of resisting--without counting the exact cost, according to the demands of such sort of life as I had blundered into. </span>
      <span id="f0393">I&#39;ve seen the devil of violence, and the devil of greed, and the devil of hot desire; but, by all the stars! </span>
      <span id="f0394">these were strong, lusty, red-eyed devils, that swayed and drove men--men, I tell you. </span>
      <span id="f0395">But as I stood on this hillside, I foresaw that in the blinding sunshine of that land I would become acquainted with a flabby, pretending, weak-eyed devil of a rapacious and pitiless folly. </span>
      <span id="f0396">How insidious he could be, too, I was only to find out several months later and a thousand miles farther. </span>
      <span id="f0397">For a moment I stood appalled, as though by a warning. </span>
      <span id="f0398">Finally I descended the hill, obliquely, towards the trees I had seen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0399">&#34;I avoided a vast artificial hole somebody had been digging on the slope, the purpose of which I found it impossible to divine. </span>
      <span id="f0400">It wasn&#39;t a quarry or a sandpit, anyhow. </span>
      <span id="f0401">It was just a hole. </span>
      <span id="f0402">It might have been connected with the philanthropic desire of giving the criminals something to do. </span>
      <span id="f0403">I don&#39;t know. </span>
      <span id="f0404">Then I nearly fell into a very narrow ravine, almost no more than a scar in the hillside. </span>
      <span id="f0405">I discovered that a lot of imported drainage-pipes for the settlement had been tumbled in there. </span>
      <span id="f0406">There wasn&#39;t one that was not broken. </span>
      <span id="f0407">It was a wanton smash-up. </span>
      <span id="f0408">At last I got under the trees. </span>
      <span id="f0409">My purpose was to stroll into the shade for a moment; but no sooner within than it seemed to me I had stepped into a gloomy circle of some Inferno. </span>
      <span id="f0410">The rapids were near, and an uninterrupted, uniform, headlong, rushing noise filled the mournful stillness of the grove, where not a breath stirred, not a leaf moved, with a mysterious sound--as though the tearing pace of the launched earth had suddenly become audible.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0411">&#34;Black shapes crouched, lay, sat between the trees, leaning against the trunks, clinging to the earth, half coming out, half effaced within the dim light, in all the attitudes of pain, abandonment, and despair. </span>
      <span id="f0412">Another mine on the cliff went off, followed by a slight shudder of the soil under my feet. </span>
      <span id="f0413">The work was going on. </span>
      <span id="f0414">The work! </span>
      <span id="f0415">And this was the place where some of the helpers had withdrawn to die.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0416">&#34;They were dying slowly--it was very clear. </span>
      <span id="f0417">They were not enemies, they were not criminals, they were nothing earthly now,--nothing but black shadows of disease and starvation, lying confusedly in the greenish gloom. </span>
      <span id="f0418">Brought from all the recesses of the coast in all the legality of time contracts, lost in uncongenial surroundings, fed on unfamiliar food, they sickened, became inefficient, and were then allowed to crawl away and rest. </span>
      <span id="f0419">These moribund shapes were free as air--and nearly as thin. </span>
      <span id="f0420">I began to distinguish the gleam of eyes under the trees. </span>
      <span id="f0421">Then, glancing down, I saw a face near my hand. </span>
      <span id="f0422">The black bones reclined at full length with one shoulder against the tree, and slowly the eyelids rose and the sunken eyes looked up at me, enormous and vacant, a kind of blind, white flicker in the depths of the orbs, which died out slowly. </span>
      <span id="f0423">The man seemed young--almost a boy--but you know with them it&#39;s hard to tell. </span>
      <span id="f0424">I found nothing else to do but to offer him one of my good Swede&#39;s ship&#39;s biscuits I had in my pocket. </span>
      <span id="f0425">The fingers closed slowly on it and held--there was no other movement and no other glance. </span>
      <span id="f0426">He had tied a bit of white worsted round his neck--Why? </span>
      <span id="f0427">Where did he get it? </span>
      <span id="f0428">Was it a badge--an ornament--a charm--a propitiatory act? </span>
      <span id="f0429">Was there any idea at all connected with it? </span>
      <span id="f0430">It looked startling round his black neck, this bit of white thread from beyond the seas.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0431">&#34;Near the same tree two more bundles of acute angles sat with their legs drawn up. </span>
      <span id="f0432">One, with his chin propped on his knees, stared at nothing, in an intolerable and appalling manner: his brother phantom rested its forehead, as if overcome with a great weariness; and all about others were scattered in every pose of contorted collapse, as in some picture of a massacre or a pestilence. </span>
      <span id="f0433">While I stood horror-struck, one of these creatures rose to his hands and knees, and went off on all-fours towards the river to drink. </span>
      <span id="f0434">He lapped out of his hand, then sat up in the sunlight, crossing his shins in front of him, and after a time let his woolly head fall on his breastbone.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>