<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Chapter I. Part 2</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0435">Chapter I. Part 2</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0437">&#34;I didn&#39;t want any more loitering in the shade, and I made haste towards the station. </span>
      <span id="f0438">When near the buildings I met a white man, in such an unexpected elegance of get-up that in the first moment I took him for a sort of vision. </span>
      <span id="f0439">I saw a high starched collar, white cuffs, a light alpaca jacket, snowy trousers, a clear necktie, and varnished boots. </span>
      <span id="f0440">No hat. </span>
      <span id="f0441">Hair parted, brushed, oiled, under a green-lined parasol held in a big white hand. </span>
      <span id="f0442">He was amazing, and had a penholder behind his ear.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0443">&#34;I shook hands with this miracle, and I learned he was the Company&#39;s chief accountant, and that all the bookkeeping was done at this station. </span>
      <span id="f0444">He had come out for a moment, he said, &#39;to get a breath of fresh air.&#39; The expression sounded wonderfully odd, with its suggestion of sedentary desk-life. </span>
      <span id="f0445">I wouldn&#39;t have mentioned the fellow to you at all, only it was from his lips that I first heard the name of the man who is so indissolubly connected with the memories of that time. </span>
      <span id="f0446">Moreover, I respected the fellow. </span>
      <span id="f0447">Yes; I respected his collars, his vast cuffs, his brushed hair. </span>
      <span id="f0448">His appearance was certainly that of a hairdresser&#39;s dummy; but in the great demoralization of the land he kept up his appearance. </span>
      <span id="f0449">That&#39;s backbone. </span>
      <span id="f0450">His starched collars and got-up shirt-fronts were achievements of character. </span>
      <span id="f0451">He had been out nearly three years; and, later on, I could not help asking him how he managed to sport such linen. </span>
      <span id="f0452">He had just the faintest blush, and said modestly, &#39;I&#39;ve been teaching one of the native women about the station. </span>
      <span id="f0453">It was difficult. </span>
      <span id="f0454">She had a distaste for the work.&#39; This man had verily accomplished something. </span>
      <span id="f0455">And he was devoted to his books, which were in apple-pie order.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0456">&#34;Everything else in the station was in a muddle,--heads, things, buildings. </span>
      <span id="f0457">Strings of dusty niggers with splay feet arrived and departed; a stream of manufactured goods, rubbishy cottons, beads, and brass-wire sent into the depths of darkness, and in return came a precious trickle of ivory.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0458">&#34;I had to wait in the station for ten days--an eternity. </span>
      <span id="f0459">I lived in a hut in the yard, but to be out of the chaos I would sometimes get into the accountant&#39;s office. </span>
      <span id="f0460">It was built of horizontal planks, and so badly put together that, as he bent over his high desk, he was barred from neck to heels with narrow strips of sunlight. </span>
      <span id="f0461">There was no need to open the big shutter to see. </span>
      <span id="f0462">It was hot there too; big flies buzzed fiendishly, and did not sting, but stabbed. </span>
      <span id="f0463">I sat generally on the floor, while, of faultless appearance (and even slightly scented), perching on a high stool, he wrote, he wrote. </span>
      <span id="f0464">Sometimes he stood up for exercise. </span>
      <span id="f0465">When a truckle-bed with a sick man (some invalided agent from up-country) was put in there, he exhibited a gentle annoyance. </span>
      <span id="f0466">&#39;The groans of this sick person,&#39; he said, &#39;distract my attention. </span>
      <span id="f0467">And without that it is extremely difficult to guard against clerical errors in this climate.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0468">&#34;One day he remarked, without lifting his head, &#39;In the interior you will no doubt meet Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0469">Kurtz.&#39; On my asking who Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0470">Kurtz was, he said he was a first-class agent; and seeing my disappointment at this information, he added slowly, laying down his pen, &#39;He is a very remarkable person.&#39; Further questions elicited from him that Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0471">Kurtz was at present in charge of a trading post, a very important one, in the true ivory-country, at &#39;the very bottom of there. </span>
      <span id="f0472">Sends in as much ivory as all the others put together. </span>
      <span id="f0473">. </span>
      <span id="f0474">. </span>
      <span id="f0475">.&#39; He began to write again. </span>
      <span id="f0476">The sick man was too ill to groan. </span>
      <span id="f0477">The flies buzzed in a great peace.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0478">&#34;Suddenly there was a growing murmur of voices and a great tramping of feet. </span>
      <span id="f0479">A caravan had come in. </span>
      <span id="f0480">A violent babble of uncouth sounds burst out on the other side of the planks. </span>
      <span id="f0481">All the carriers were speaking together, and in the midst of the uproar the lamentable voice of the chief agent was heard &#39;giving it up&#39; tearfully for the twentieth time that day. </span>
      <span id="f0482">. </span>
      <span id="f0483">. </span>
      <span id="f0484">. </span>
      <span id="f0485">He rose slowly. </span>
      <span id="f0486">&#39;What a frightful row,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f0487">He crossed the room gently to look at the sick man, and returning, said to me, &#39;He does not hear.&#39; &#39;What! </span>
      <span id="f0488">Dead?&#39; I asked, startled. </span>
      <span id="f0489">&#39;No, not yet,&#39; he answered, with great composure. </span>
      <span id="f0490">Then, alluding with a toss of the head to the tumult in the station-yard, &#39;When one has got to make correct entries, one comes to hate those savages--hate them to the death.&#39; He remained thoughtful for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f0491">&#39;When you see Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0492">Kurtz,&#39; he went on, &#39;tell him from me that everything here&#39;--he glanced at the desk--&#39;is very satisfactory. </span>
      <span id="f0493">I don&#39;t like to write to him--with those messengers of ours you never know who may get hold of your letter--at that Central Station.&#39; He stared at me for a moment with his mild, bulging eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0494">&#39;Oh, he will go far, very far,&#39; he began again. </span>
      <span id="f0495">&#39;He will be a somebody in the Administration before long. </span>
      <span id="f0496">They, above--the Council in Europe, you know--mean him to be.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0497">&#34;He turned to his work. </span>
      <span id="f0498">The noise outside had ceased, and presently in going out I stopped at the door. </span>
      <span id="f0499">In the steady buzz of flies the homeward-bound agent was lying flushed and insensible; the other, bent over his books, was making correct entries of perfectly correct transactions; and fifty feet below the doorstep I could see the still tree-tops of the grove of death.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0500">&#34;Next day I left that station at last, with a caravan of sixty men, for a two-hundred-mile tramp.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0501">&#34;No use telling you much about that. </span>
      <span id="f0502">Paths, paths, everywhere; a stamped-in network of paths spreading over the empty land, through long grass, through burnt grass, through thickets, down and up chilly ravines, up and down stony hills ablaze with heat; and a solitude, a solitude, nobody, not a hut. </span>
      <span id="f0503">The population had cleared out a long time ago. </span>
      <span id="f0504">Well, if a lot of mysterious niggers armed with all kinds of fearful weapons suddenly took to traveling on the road between Deal and Gravesend, catching the yokels right and left to carry heavy loads for them, I fancy every farm and cottage thereabouts would get empty very soon. </span>
      <span id="f0505">Only here the dwellings were gone too. </span>
      <span id="f0506">Still I passed through several abandoned villages. </span>
      <span id="f0507">There&#39;s something pathetically childish in the ruins of grass walls. </span>
      <span id="f0508">Day after day, with the stamp and shuffle of sixty pair of bare feet behind me, each pair under a 60-lb. </span>
      <span id="f0509">load. </span>
      <span id="f0510">Camp, cook, sleep, strike camp, march. </span>
      <span id="f0511">Now and then a carrier dead in harness, at rest in the long grass near the path, with an empty water-gourd and his long staff lying by his side. </span>
      <span id="f0512">A great silence around and above. </span>
      <span id="f0513">Perhaps on some quiet night the tremor of far-off drums, sinking, swelling, a tremor vast, faint; a sound weird, appealing, suggestive, and wild--and perhaps with as profound a meaning as the sound of bells in a Christian country. </span>
      <span id="f0514">Once a white man in an unbuttoned uniform, camping on the path with an armed escort of lank Zanzibaris, very hospitable and festive--not to say drunk. </span>
      <span id="f0515">Was looking after the upkeep of the road, he declared. </span>
      <span id="f0516">Can&#39;t say I saw any road or any upkeep, unless the body of a middle-aged negro, with a bullet-hole in the forehead, upon which I absolutely stumbled three miles farther on, may be considered as a permanent improvement. </span>
      <span id="f0517">I had a white companion too, not a bad chap, but rather too fleshy and with the exasperating habit of fainting on the hot hillsides, miles away from the least bit of shade and water. </span>
      <span id="f0518">Annoying, you know, to hold your own coat like a parasol over a man&#39;s head while he is coming-to. </span>
      <span id="f0519">I couldn&#39;t help asking him once what he meant by coming there at all. </span>
      <span id="f0520">&#39;To make money, of course. </span>
      <span id="f0521">What do you think?&#39; he said, scornfully. </span>
      <span id="f0522">Then he got fever, and had to be carried in a hammock slung under a pole. </span>
      <span id="f0523">As he weighed sixteen stone I had no end of rows with the carriers. </span>
      <span id="f0524">They jibbed, ran away, sneaked off with their loads in the night--quite a mutiny. </span>
      <span id="f0525">So, one evening, I made a speech in English with gestures, not one of which was lost to the sixty pairs of eyes before me, and the next morning I started the hammock off in front all right. </span>
      <span id="f0526">An hour afterwards I came upon the whole concern wrecked in a bush--man, hammock, groans, blankets, horrors. </span>
      <span id="f0527">The heavy pole had skinned his poor nose. </span>
      <span id="f0528">He was very anxious for me to kill somebody, but there wasn&#39;t the shadow of a carrier near. </span>
      <span id="f0529">I remembered the old doctor,--&#39;It would be interesting for science to watch the mental changes of individuals, on the spot.&#39; I felt I was becoming scientifically interesting. </span>
      <span id="f0530">However, all that is to no purpose. </span>
      <span id="f0531">On the fifteenth day I came in sight of the big river again, and hobbled into the Central Station. </span>
      <span id="f0532">It was on a back water surrounded by scrub and forest, with a pretty border of smelly mud on one side, and on the three others inclosed by a crazy fence of rushes. </span>
      <span id="f0533">A neglected gap was all the gate it had, and the first glance at the place was enough to let you see the flabby devil was running that show. </span>
      <span id="f0534">White men with long staves in their hands appeared languidly from amongst the buildings, strolling up to take a look at me, and then retired out of sight somewhere. </span>
      <span id="f0535">One of them, a stout, excitable chap with black mustaches, informed me with great volubility and many digressions, as soon as I told him who I was, that my steamer was at the bottom of the river. </span>
      <span id="f0536">I was thunderstruck. </span>
      <span id="f0537">What, how, why? </span>
      <span id="f0538">Oh, it was &#39;all right.&#39; The &#39;manager himself&#39; was there. </span>
      <span id="f0539">All quite correct. </span>
      <span id="f0540">&#39;Everybody had behaved splendidly! </span>
      <span id="f0541">splendidly!&#39;--&#39;you must,&#39; he said in agitation, &#39;go and see the general manager at once. </span>
      <span id="f0542">He is waiting!&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0543">&#34;I did not see the real significance of that wreck at once. </span>
      <span id="f0544">I fancy I see it now, but I am not sure--not at all. </span>
      <span id="f0545">Certainly the affair was too stupid--when I think of it--to be altogether natural. </span>
      <span id="f0546">Still. </span>
      <span id="f0547">. </span>
      <span id="f0548">. </span>
      <span id="f0549">. </span>
      <span id="f0550">But at the moment it presented itself simply as a confounded nuisance. </span>
      <span id="f0551">The steamer was sunk. </span>
      <span id="f0552">They had started two days before in a sudden hurry up the river with the manager on board, in charge of some volunteer skipper, and before they had been out three hours they tore the bottom out of her on stones, and she sank near the south bank. </span>
      <span id="f0553">I asked myself what I was to do there, now my boat was lost. </span>
      <span id="f0554">As a matter of fact, I had plenty to do in fishing my command out of the river. </span>
      <span id="f0555">I had to set about it the very next day. </span>
      <span id="f0556">That, and the repairs when I brought the pieces to the station, took some months.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0557">&#34;My first interview with the manager was curious. </span>
      <span id="f0558">He did not ask me to sit down after my twenty-mile walk that morning. </span>
      <span id="f0559">He was commonplace in complexion, in features, in manners, and in voice. </span>
      <span id="f0560">He was of middle size and of ordinary build. </span>
      <span id="f0561">His eyes, of the usual blue, were perhaps remarkably cold, and he certainly could make his glance fall on one as trenchant and heavy as an ax. </span>
      <span id="f0562">But even at these times the rest of his person seemed to disclaim the intention. </span>
      <span id="f0563">Otherwise there was only an indefinable, faint expression of his lips, something stealthy--a smile--not a smile--I remember it, but I can&#39;t explain. </span>
      <span id="f0564">It was unconscious, this smile was, though just after he had said something it got intensified for an instant. </span>
      <span id="f0565">It came at the end of his speeches like a seal applied on the words to make the meaning of the commonest phrase appear absolutely inscrutable. </span>
      <span id="f0566">He was a common trader, from his youth up employed in these parts--nothing more. </span>
      <span id="f0567">He was obeyed, yet he inspired neither love nor fear, nor even respect. </span>
      <span id="f0568">He inspired uneasiness. </span>
      <span id="f0569">That was it! </span>
      <span id="f0570">Uneasiness. </span>
      <span id="f0571">Not a definite mistrust--just uneasiness--nothing more. </span>
      <span id="f0572">You have no idea how effective such a . </span>
      <span id="f0573">. </span>
      <span id="f0574">. </span>
      <span id="f0575">a . </span>
      <span id="f0576">. </span>
      <span id="f0577">. </span>
      <span id="f0578">faculty can be. </span>
      <span id="f0579">He had no genius for organizing, for initiative, or for order even. </span>
      <span id="f0580">That was evident in such things as the deplorable state of the station. </span>
      <span id="f0581">He had no learning, and no intelligence. </span>
      <span id="f0582">His position had come to him--why? </span>
      <span id="f0583">Perhaps because he was never ill . </span>
      <span id="f0584">. </span>
      <span id="f0585">. </span>
      <span id="f0586">He had served three terms of three years out there . </span>
      <span id="f0587">. </span>
      <span id="f0588">. </span>
      <span id="f0589">Because triumphant health in the general rout of constitutions is a kind of power in itself. </span>
      <span id="f0590">When he went home on leave he rioted on a large scale--pompously. </span>
      <span id="f0591">Jack ashore--with a difference--in externals only. </span>
      <span id="f0592">This one could gather from his casual talk. </span>
      <span id="f0593">He originated nothing, he could keep the routine going--that&#39;s all. </span>
      <span id="f0594">But he was great. </span>
      <span id="f0595">He was great by this little thing that it was impossible to tell what could control such a man. </span>
      <span id="f0596">He never gave that secret away. </span>
      <span id="f0597">Perhaps there was nothing within him. </span>
      <span id="f0598">Such a suspicion made one pause--for out there there were no external checks. </span>
      <span id="f0599">Once when various tropical diseases had laid low almost every &#39;agent&#39; in the station, he was heard to say, &#39;Men who come out here should have no entrails.&#39; He sealed the utterance with that smile of his, as though it had been a door opening into a darkness he had in his keeping. </span>
      <span id="f0600">You fancied you had seen things--but the seal was on. </span>
      <span id="f0601">When annoyed at meal-times by the constant quarrels of the white men about precedence, he ordered an immense round table to be made, for which a special house had to be built. </span>
      <span id="f0602">This was the station&#39;s mess-room. </span>
      <span id="f0603">Where he sat was the first place--the rest were nowhere. </span>
      <span id="f0604">One felt this to be his unalterable conviction. </span>
      <span id="f0605">He was neither civil nor uncivil. </span>
      <span id="f0606">He was quiet. </span>
      <span id="f0607">He allowed his &#39;boy&#39;--an overfed young negro from the coast--to treat the white men, under his very eyes, with provoking insolence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0608">&#34;He began to speak as soon as he saw me. </span>
      <span id="f0609">I had been very long on the road. </span>
      <span id="f0610">He could not wait. </span>
      <span id="f0611">Had to start without me. </span>
      <span id="f0612">The up-river stations had to be relieved. </span>
      <span id="f0613">There had been so many delays already that he did not know who was dead and who was alive, and how they got on--and so on, and so on. </span>
      <span id="f0614">He paid no attention to my explanations, and, playing with a stick of sealing-wax, repeated several times that the situation was &#39;very grave, very grave.&#39; There were rumors that a very important station was in jeopardy, and its chief, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0615">Kurtz, was ill. </span>
      <span id="f0616">Hoped it was not true. </span>
      <span id="f0617">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0618">Kurtz was . </span>
      <span id="f0619">. </span>
      <span id="f0620">. </span>
      <span id="f0621">I felt weary and irritable. </span>
      <span id="f0622">Hang Kurtz, I thought. </span>
      <span id="f0623">I interrupted him by saying I had heard of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0624">Kurtz on the coast. </span>
      <span id="f0625">&#39;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f0626">So they talk of him down there,&#39; he murmured to himself. </span>
      <span id="f0627">Then he began again, assuring me Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0628">Kurtz was the best agent he had, an exceptional man, of the greatest importance to the Company; therefore I could understand his anxiety. </span>
      <span id="f0629">He was, he said, &#39;very, very uneasy.&#39; Certainly he fidgeted on his chair a good deal, exclaimed, &#39;Ah, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0630">Kurtz!&#39; broke the stick of sealing-wax and seemed dumbfounded by the accident. </span>
      <span id="f0631">Next thing he wanted to know &#39;how long it would take to&#39; . </span>
      <span id="f0632">. </span>
      <span id="f0633">. </span>
      <span id="f0634">I interrupted him again. </span>
      <span id="f0635">Being hungry, you know, and kept on my feet too, I was getting savage. </span>
      <span id="f0636">&#39;How could I tell,&#39; I said. </span>
      <span id="f0637">&#39;I hadn&#39;t even seen the wreck yet--some months, no doubt.&#39; All this talk seemed to me so futile. </span>
      <span id="f0638">&#39;Some months,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f0639">&#39;Well, let us say three months before we can make a start. </span>
      <span id="f0640">Yes. </span>
      <span id="f0641">That ought to do the affair.&#39; I flung out of his hut (he lived all alone in a clay hut with a sort of veranda) muttering to myself my opinion of him. </span>
      <span id="f0642">He was a chattering idiot. </span>
      <span id="f0643">Afterwards I took it back when it was borne in upon me startlingly with what extreme nicety he had estimated the time requisite for the &#39;affair.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0644">&#34;I went to work the next day, turning, so to speak, my back on that station. </span>
      <span id="f0645">In that way only it seemed to me I could keep my hold on the redeeming facts of life. </span>
      <span id="f0646">Still, one must look about sometimes; and then I saw this station, these men strolling aimlessly about in the sunshine of the yard. </span>
      <span id="f0647">I asked myself sometimes what it all meant. </span>
      <span id="f0648">They wandered here and there with their absurd long staves in their hands, like a lot of faithless pilgrims bewitched inside a rotten fence. </span>
      <span id="f0649">The word &#39;ivory&#39; rang in the air, was whispered, was sighed. </span>
      <span id="f0650">You would think they were praying to it. </span>
      <span id="f0651">A taint of imbecile rapacity blew through it all, like a whiff from some corpse. </span>
      <span id="f0652">By Jove! </span>
      <span id="f0653">I&#39;ve never seen anything so unreal in my life. </span>
      <span id="f0654">And outside, the silent wilderness surrounding this cleared speck on the earth struck me as something great and invincible, like evil or truth, waiting patiently for the passing away of this fantastic invasion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0655">&#34;Oh, these months! </span>
      <span id="f0656">Well, never mind. </span>
      <span id="f0657">Various things happened. </span>
      <span id="f0658">One evening a grass shed full of calico, cotton prints, beads, and I don&#39;t know what else, burst into a blaze so suddenly that you would have thought the earth had opened to let an avenging fire consume all that trash. </span>
      <span id="f0659">I was smoking my pipe quietly by my dismantled steamer, and saw them all cutting capers in the light, with their arms lifted high, when the stout man with mustaches came tearing down to the river, a tin pail in his hand, assured me that everybody was &#39;behaving splendidly, splendidly,&#39; dipped about a quart of water and tore back again. </span>
      <span id="f0660">I noticed there was a hole in the bottom of his pail.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0661">&#34;I strolled up. </span>
      <span id="f0662">There was no hurry. </span>
      <span id="f0663">You see the thing had gone off like a box of matches. </span>
      <span id="f0664">It had been hopeless from the very first. </span>
      <span id="f0665">The flame had leaped high, driven everybody back, lighted up everything--and collapsed. </span>
      <span id="f0666">The shed was already a heap of embers glowing fiercely. </span>
      <span id="f0667">A nigger was being beaten near by. </span>
      <span id="f0668">They said he had caused the fire in some way; be that as it may, he was screeching most horribly. </span>
      <span id="f0669">I saw him, later on, for several days, sitting in a bit of shade looking very sick and trying to recover himself: afterwards he arose and went out--and the wilderness without a sound took him into its bosom again. </span>
      <span id="f0670">As I approached the glow from the dark I found myself at the back of two men, talking. </span>
      <span id="f0671">I heard the name of Kurtz pronounced, then the words, &#39;take advantage of this unfortunate accident.&#39; One of the men was the manager. </span>
      <span id="f0672">I wished him a good evening. </span>
      <span id="f0673">&#39;Did you ever see anything like it--eh? </span>
      <span id="f0674">it is incredible,&#39; he said, and walked off. </span>
      <span id="f0675">The other man remained. </span>
      <span id="f0676">He was a first-class agent, young, gentlemanly, a bit reserved, with a forked little beard and a hooked nose. </span>
      <span id="f0677">He was stand-offish with the other agents, and they on their side said he was the manager&#39;s spy upon them. </span>
      <span id="f0678">As to me, I had hardly ever spoken to him before. </span>
      <span id="f0679">We got into talk, and by-and-by we strolled away from the hissing ruins. </span>
      <span id="f0680">Then he asked me to his room, which was in the main building of the station. </span>
      <span id="f0681">He struck a match, and I perceived that this young aristocrat had not only a silver-mounted dressing-case but also a whole candle all to himself. </span>
      <span id="f0682">Just at that time the manager was the only man supposed to have any right to candles. </span>
      <span id="f0683">Native mats covered the clay walls; a collection of spears, assegais, shields, knives was hung up in trophies. </span>
      <span id="f0684">The business intrusted to this fellow was the making of bricks--so I had been informed; but there wasn&#39;t a fragment of a brick anywhere in the station, and he had been there more than a year--waiting. </span>
      <span id="f0685">It seems he could not make bricks without something, I don&#39;t know what--straw maybe. </span>
      <span id="f0686">Anyways, it could not be found there, and as it was not likely to be sent from Europe, it did not appear clear to me what he was waiting for. </span>
      <span id="f0687">An act of special creation perhaps. </span>
      <span id="f0688">However, they were all waiting--all the sixteen or twenty pilgrims of them--for something; and upon my word it did not seem an uncongenial occupation, from the way they took it, though the only thing that ever came to them was disease--as far as I could see. </span>
      <span id="f0689">They beguiled the time by backbiting and intriguing against each other in a foolish kind of way. </span>
      <span id="f0690">There was an air of plotting about that station, but nothing came of it, of course. </span>
      <span id="f0691">It was as unreal as everything else--as the philanthropic pretense of the whole concern, as their talk, as their government, as their show of work. </span>
      <span id="f0692">The only real feeling was a desire to get appointed to a trading-post where ivory was to be had, so that they could earn percentages. </span>
      <span id="f0693">They intrigued and slandered and hated each other only on that account,--but as to effectually lifting a little finger--oh, no. </span>
      <span id="f0694">By heavens! </span>
      <span id="f0695">there is something after all in the world allowing one man to steal a horse while another must not look at a halter. </span>
      <span id="f0696">Steal a horse straight out. </span>
      <span id="f0697">Very well. </span>
      <span id="f0698">He has done it. </span>
      <span id="f0699">Perhaps he can ride. </span>
      <span id="f0700">But there is a way of looking at a halter that would provoke the most charitable of saints into a kick.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0701">&#34;I had no idea why he wanted to be sociable, but as we chatted in there it suddenly occurred to me the fellow was trying to get at something--in fact, pumping me. </span>
      <span id="f0702">He alluded constantly to Europe, to the people I was supposed to know there--putting leading questions as to my acquaintances in the sepulchral city, and so on. </span>
      <span id="f0703">His little eyes glittered like mica discs--with curiosity,--though he tried to keep up a bit of superciliousness. </span>
      <span id="f0704">At first I was astonished, but very soon I became awfully curious to see what he would find out from me. </span>
      <span id="f0705">I couldn&#39;t possibly imagine what I had in me to make it worth his while. </span>
      <span id="f0706">It was very pretty to see how he baffled himself, for in truth my body was full of chills, and my head had nothing in it but that wretched steamboat business. </span>
      <span id="f0707">It was evident he took me for a perfectly shameless prevaricator. </span>
      <span id="f0708">At last he got angry, and to conceal a movement of furious annoyance, he yawned. </span>
      <span id="f0709">I rose. </span>
      <span id="f0710">Then I noticed a small sketch in oils, on a panel, representing a woman, draped and blindfolded, carrying a lighted torch. </span>
      <span id="f0711">The background was somber--almost black. </span>
      <span id="f0712">The movement of the woman was stately, and the effect of the torchlight on the face was sinister.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0713">&#34;It arrested me, and he stood by civilly, holding a half-pint champagne bottle (medical comforts) with the candle stuck in it. </span>
      <span id="f0714">To my question he said Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0715">Kurtz had painted this--in this very station more than a year ago--while waiting for means to go to his trading-post. </span>
      <span id="f0716">&#39;Tell me, pray,&#39; said I, &#39;who is this Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0717">Kurtz?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0718">&#34;&#39;The chief of the Inner Station,&#39; he answered in a short tone, looking away. </span>
      <span id="f0719">&#39;Much obliged,&#39; I said, laughing. </span>
      <span id="f0720">&#39;And you are the brickmaker of the Central Station. </span>
      <span id="f0721">Everyone knows that.&#39; He was silent for a while. </span>
      <span id="f0722">&#39;He is a prodigy,&#39; he said at last. </span>
      <span id="f0723">&#39;He is an emissary of pity, and science, and progress, and devil knows what else. </span>
      <span id="f0724">We want,&#39; he began to declaim suddenly, &#39;for the guidance of the cause intrusted to us by Europe, so to speak, higher intelligence, wide sympathies, a singleness of purpose.&#39; &#39;Who says that?&#39; I asked. </span>
      <span id="f0725">&#39;Lots of them,&#39; he replied. </span>
      <span id="f0726">&#39;Some even write that; and so _he_ comes here, a special being, as you ought to know.&#39; &#39;Why ought I to know?&#39; I interrupted, really surprised. </span>
      <span id="f0727">He paid no attention. </span>
      <span id="f0728">&#39;Yes. </span>
      <span id="f0729">To-day he is chief of the best station, next year he will be assistant-manager, two years more and . </span>
      <span id="f0730">. </span>
      <span id="f0731">. </span>
      <span id="f0732">but I dare say you know what he will be in two years&#39; time. </span>
      <span id="f0733">You are of the new gang--the gang of virtue. </span>
      <span id="f0734">The same people who sent him specially also recommended you. </span>
      <span id="f0735">Oh, don&#39;t say no. </span>
      <span id="f0736">I&#39;ve my own eyes to trust.&#39; Light dawned upon me. </span>
      <span id="f0737">My dear aunt&#39;s influential acquaintances were producing an unexpected effect upon that young man. </span>
      <span id="f0738">I nearly burst into a laugh. </span>
      <span id="f0739">&#39;Do you read the Company&#39;s confidential correspondence?&#39; I asked. </span>
      <span id="f0740">He hadn&#39;t a word to say. </span>
      <span id="f0741">It was great fun. </span>
      <span id="f0742">&#39;When Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0743">Kurtz,&#39; I continued severely, &#39;is General Manager, you won&#39;t have the opportunity.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0744">&#34;He blew the candle out suddenly, and we went outside. </span>
      <span id="f0745">The moon had risen. </span>
      <span id="f0746">Black figures strolled about listlessly, pouring water on the glow, whence proceeded a sound of hissing; steam ascended in the moonlight, the beaten nigger groaned somewhere. </span>
      <span id="f0747">&#39;What a row the brute makes!&#39; said the indefatigable man with the mustaches, appearing near us. </span>
      <span id="f0748">&#39;Serve him right. </span>
      <span id="f0749">Transgression--punishment--bang! </span>
      <span id="f0750">Pitiless, pitiless. </span>
      <span id="f0751">That&#39;s the only way. </span>
      <span id="f0752">This will prevent all conflagrations for the future. </span>
      <span id="f0753">I was just telling the manager . </span>
      <span id="f0754">. </span>
      <span id="f0755">.&#39; He noticed my companion, and became crestfallen all at once. </span>
      <span id="f0756">&#39;Not in bed yet,&#39; he said, with a kind of servile heartiness; &#39;it&#39;s so natural. </span>
      <span id="f0757">Ha! </span>
      <span id="f0758">Danger--agitation.&#39; He vanished. </span>
      <span id="f0759">I went on to the river-side, and the other followed me. </span>
      <span id="f0760">I heard a scathing murmur at my ear, &#39;Heap of muffs--go to.&#39; The pilgrims could be seen in knots gesticulating, discussing. </span>
      <span id="f0761">Several had still their staves in their hands. </span>
      <span id="f0762">I verily believe they took these sticks to bed with them. </span>
      <span id="f0763">Beyond the fence the forest stood up spectrally in the moonlight, and through the dim stir, through the faint sounds of that lamentable courtyard, the silence of the land went home to one&#39;s very heart,--its mystery, its greatness, the amazing reality of its concealed life. </span>
      <span id="f0764">The hurt nigger moaned feebly somewhere near by, and then fetched a deep sigh that made me mend my pace away from there. </span>
      <span id="f0765">I felt a hand introducing itself under my arm. </span>
      <span id="f0766">&#39;My dear sir,&#39; said the fellow, &#39;I don&#39;t want to be misunderstood, and especially by you, who will see Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0767">Kurtz long before I can have that pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f0768">I wouldn&#39;t like him to get a false idea of my disposition. </span>
      <span id="f0769">. </span>
      <span id="f0770">. </span>
      <span id="f0771">.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0772">&#34;I let him run on, this _papier-mache_ Mephistopheles, and it seemed to me that if I tried I could poke my forefinger through him, and would find nothing inside but a little loose dirt, maybe. </span>
      <span id="f0773">He, don&#39;t you see, had been planning to be assistant-manager by-and-by under the present man, and I could see that the coming of that Kurtz had upset them both not a little. </span>
      <span id="f0774">He talked precipitately, and I did not try to stop him. </span>
      <span id="f0775">I had my shoulders against the wreck of my steamer, hauled up on the slope like a carcass of some big river animal. </span>
      <span id="f0776">The smell of mud, of primeval mud, by Jove! </span>
      <span id="f0777">was in my nostrils, the high stillness of primeval forest was before my eyes; there were shiny patches on the black creek. </span>
      <span id="f0778">The moon had spread over everything a thin layer of silver--over the rank grass, over the mud, upon the wall of matted vegetation standing higher than the wall of a temple, over the great river I could see through a somber gap glittering, glittering, as it flowed broadly by without a murmur. </span>
      <span id="f0779">All this was great, expectant, mute, while the man jabbered about himself. </span>
      <span id="f0780">I wondered whether the stillness on the face of the immensity looking at us two were meant as an appeal or as a menace. </span>
      <span id="f0781">What were we who had strayed in here? </span>
      <span id="f0782">Could we handle that dumb thing, or would it handle us? </span>
      <span id="f0783">I felt how big, how confoundedly big, was that thing that couldn&#39;t talk, and perhaps was deaf as well. </span>
      <span id="f0784">What was in there? </span>
      <span id="f0785">I could see a little ivory coming out from there, and I had heard Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0786">Kurtz was in there. </span>
      <span id="f0787">I had heard enough about it too--God knows! </span>
      <span id="f0788">Yet somehow it didn&#39;t bring any image with it--no more than if I had been told an angel or a fiend was in there. </span>
      <span id="f0789">I believed it in the same way one of you might believe there are inhabitants in the planet Mars. </span>
      <span id="f0790">I knew once a Scotch sailmaker who was certain, dead sure, there were people in Mars. </span>
      <span id="f0791">If you asked him for some idea how they looked and behaved, he would get shy and mutter something about &#39;walking on all-fours.&#39; If you as much as smiled, he would--though a man of sixty--offer to fight you. </span>
      <span id="f0792">I would not have gone so far as to fight for Kurtz, but I went for him near enough to a lie. </span>
      <span id="f0793">You know I hate, detest, and can&#39;t bear a lie, not because I am straighter than the rest of us, but simply because it appalls me. </span>
      <span id="f0794">There is a taint of death, a flavor of mortality in lies,--which is exactly what I hate and detest in the world--what I want to forget. </span>
      <span id="f0795">It makes me miserable and sick, like biting something rotten would do. </span>
      <span id="f0796">Temperament, I suppose. </span>
      <span id="f0797">Well, I went near enough to it by letting the young fool there believe anything he liked to imagine as to my influence in Europe. </span>
      <span id="f0798">I became in an instant as much of a pretense as the rest of the bewitched pilgrims. </span>
      <span id="f0799">This simply because I had a notion it somehow would be of help to that Kurtz whom at the time I did not see--you understand. </span>
      <span id="f0800">He was just a word for me. </span>
      <span id="f0801">I did not see the man in the name any more than you do. </span>
      <span id="f0802">Do you see him? </span>
      <span id="f0803">Do you see the story? </span>
      <span id="f0804">Do you see anything? </span>
      <span id="f0805">It seems to me I am trying to tell you a dream--making a vain attempt, because no relation of a dream can convey the dream-sensation, that commingling of absurdity, surprise, and bewilderment in a tremor of struggling revolt, that notion of being captured by the incredible which is of the very essence of dreams. </span>
      <span id="f0806">. </span>
      <span id="f0807">. </span>
      <span id="f0808">.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0809">He was silent for a while.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0810">&#34;. </span>
      <span id="f0811">. </span>
      <span id="f0812">. </span>
      <span id="f0813">No, it is impossible; it is impossible to convey the life-sensation of any given epoch of one&#39;s existence,--that which makes its truth, its meaning--its subtle and penetrating essence. </span>
      <span id="f0814">It is impossible. </span>
      <span id="f0815">We live, as we dream--alone. </span>
      <span id="f0816">. </span>
      <span id="f0817">. </span>
      <span id="f0818">.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0819">He paused again as if reflecting, then added--&#34;Of course in this you fellows see more than I could then. </span>
      <span id="f0820">You see me, whom you know. </span>
      <span id="f0821">. </span>
      <span id="f0822">. </span>
      <span id="f0823">.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0824">It had become so pitch dark that we listeners could hardly see one another. </span>
      <span id="f0825">For a long time already he, sitting apart, had been no more to us than a voice. </span>
      <span id="f0826">There was not a word from anybody. </span>
      <span id="f0827">The others might have been asleep, but I was awake. </span>
      <span id="f0828">I listened, I listened on the watch for the sentence, for the word, that would give me the clew to the faint uneasiness inspired by this narrative that seemed to shape itself without human lips in the heavy night-air of the river.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0829">&#34;. </span>
      <span id="f0830">. </span>
      <span id="f0831">. </span>
      <span id="f0832">Yes--I let him run on,&#34; Marlow began again, &#34;and think what he pleased about the powers that were behind me. </span>
      <span id="f0833">I did! </span>
      <span id="f0834">And there was nothing behind me! </span>
      <span id="f0835">There was nothing but that wretched, old, mangled steamboat I was leaning against, while he talked fluently about &#39;the necessity for every man to get on.&#39; &#39;And when one comes out here, you conceive, it is not to gaze at the moon.&#39; Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0836">Kurtz was a &#39;universal genius,&#39; but even a genius would find it easier to work with &#39;adequate tools--intelligent men.&#39; He did not make bricks--why, there was a physical impossibility in the way--as I was well aware; and if he did secretarial work for the manager, it was because &#39;no sensible man rejects wantonly the confidence of his superiors.&#39; Did I see it? </span>
      <span id="f0837">I saw it. </span>
      <span id="f0838">What more did I want? </span>
      <span id="f0839">What I really wanted was rivets, by heaven! </span>
      <span id="f0840">Rivets. </span>
      <span id="f0841">To get on with the work--to stop the hole. </span>
      <span id="f0842">Rivets I wanted. </span>
      <span id="f0843">There were cases of them down at the coast--cases--piled up--burst--split! </span>
      <span id="f0844">You kicked a loose rivet at every second step in that station yard on the hillside. </span>
      <span id="f0845">Rivets had rolled into the grove of death. </span>
      <span id="f0846">You could fill your pockets with rivets for the trouble of stooping down--and there wasn&#39;t one rivet to be found where it was wanted. </span>
      <span id="f0847">We had plates that would do, but nothing to fasten them with. </span>
      <span id="f0848">And every week the messenger, a lone negro, letter-bag on shoulder and staff in hand, left our station for the coast. </span>
      <span id="f0849">And several times a week a coast caravan came in with trade goods,--ghastly glazed calico that made you shudder only to look at it, glass beads value about a penny a quart, confounded spotted cotton handkerchiefs. </span>
      <span id="f0850">And no rivets. </span>
      <span id="f0851">Three carriers could have brought all that was wanted to set that steamboat afloat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0852">&#34;He was becoming confidential now, but I fancy my unresponsive attitude must have exasperated him at last, for he judged it necessary to inform me he feared neither God nor devil, let alone any mere man. </span>
      <span id="f0853">I said I could see that very well, but what I wanted was a certain quantity of rivets--and rivets were what really Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0854">Kurtz wanted, if he had only known it. </span>
      <span id="f0855">Now letters went to the coast every week. </span>
      <span id="f0856">. </span>
      <span id="f0857">. </span>
      <span id="f0858">. </span>
      <span id="f0859">&#39;My dear sir,&#39; he cried, &#39;I write from dictation.&#39; I demanded rivets. </span>
      <span id="f0860">There was a way--for an intelligent man. </span>
      <span id="f0861">He changed his manner; became very cold, and suddenly began to talk about a hippopotamus; wondered whether sleeping on board the steamer (I stuck to my salvage night and day) I wasn&#39;t disturbed. </span>
      <span id="f0862">There was an old hippo that had the bad habit of getting out on the bank and roaming at night over the station grounds. </span>
      <span id="f0863">The pilgrims used to turn out in a body and empty every rifle they could lay hands on at him. </span>
      <span id="f0864">Some even had sat up o&#39; nights for him. </span>
      <span id="f0865">All this energy was wasted, though. </span>
      <span id="f0866">&#39;That animal has a charmed life,&#39; he said; &#39;but you can say this only of brutes in this country. </span>
      <span id="f0867">No man--you apprehend me?--no man here bears a charmed life.&#39; He stood there for a moment in the moonlight with his delicate hooked nose set a little askew, and his mica eyes glittering without a wink, then, with a curt Good night, he strode off. </span>
      <span id="f0868">I could see he was disturbed and considerably puzzled, which made me feel more hopeful than I had been for days. </span>
      <span id="f0869">It was a great comfort to turn from that chap to my influential friend, the battered, twisted, ruined, tin-pot steamboat. </span>
      <span id="f0870">I clambered on board. </span>
      <span id="f0871">She rang under my feet like an empty Huntley &amp; Palmer biscuit-tin kicked along a gutter; she was nothing so solid in make, and rather less pretty in shape, but I had expended enough hard work on her to make me love her. </span>
      <span id="f0872">No influential friend would have served me better. </span>
      <span id="f0873">She had given me a chance to come out a bit--to find out what I could do. </span>
      <span id="f0874">No, I don&#39;t like work. </span>
      <span id="f0875">I had rather laze about and think of all the fine things that can be done. </span>
      <span id="f0876">I don&#39;t like work--no man does--but I like what is in the work,--the chance to find yourself. </span>
      <span id="f0877">Your own reality--for yourself, not for others--what no other man can ever know. </span>
      <span id="f0878">They can only see the mere show, and never can tell what it really means.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0879">&#34;I was not surprised to see somebody sitting aft, on the deck, with his legs dangling over the mud. </span>
      <span id="f0880">You see I rather chummed with the few mechanics there were in that station, whom the other pilgrims naturally despised--on account of their imperfect manners, I suppose. </span>
      <span id="f0881">This was the foreman--a boiler-maker by trade--a good worker. </span>
      <span id="f0882">He was a lank, bony, yellow-faced man, with big intense eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0883">His aspect was worried, and his head was as bald as the palm of my hand; but his hair in falling seemed to have stuck to his chin, and had prospered in the new locality, for his beard hung down to his waist. </span>
      <span id="f0884">He was a widower with six young children (he had left them in charge of a sister of his to come out there), and the passion of his life was pigeon-flying. </span>
      <span id="f0885">He was an enthusiast and a connoisseur. </span>
      <span id="f0886">He would rave about pigeons. </span>
      <span id="f0887">After work hours he used sometimes to come over from his hut for a talk about his children and his pigeons; at work, when he had to crawl in the mud under the bottom of the steamboat, he would tie up that beard of his in a kind of white serviette he brought for the purpose. </span>
      <span id="f0888">It had loops to go over his ears. </span>
      <span id="f0889">In the evening he could be seen squatted on the bank rinsing that wrapper in the creek with great care, then spreading it solemnly on a bush to dry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0890">&#34;I slapped him on the back and shouted, &#39;We shall have rivets!&#39; He scrambled to his feet exclaiming &#39;No! </span>
      <span id="f0891">Rivets!&#39; as though he couldn&#39;t believe his ears. </span>
      <span id="f0892">Then in a low voice, &#39;You . </span>
      <span id="f0893">. </span>
      <span id="f0894">. </span>
      <span id="f0895">eh?&#39; I don&#39;t know why we behaved like lunatics. </span>
      <span id="f0896">I put my finger to the side of my nose and nodded mysteriously. </span>
      <span id="f0897">&#39;Good for you!&#39; he cried, snapped his fingers above his head, lifting one foot. </span>
      <span id="f0898">I tried a jig. </span>
      <span id="f0899">We capered on the iron deck. </span>
      <span id="f0900">A frightful clatter came out of that hulk, and the virgin forest on the other bank of the creek sent it back in a thundering roll upon the sleeping station. </span>
      <span id="f0901">It must have made some of the pilgrims sit up in their hovels. </span>
      <span id="f0902">A dark figure obscured the lighted doorway of the manager&#39;s hut, vanished, then, a second or so after, the doorway itself vanished too. </span>
      <span id="f0903">We stopped, and the silence driven away by the stamping of our feet flowed back again from the recesses of the land. </span>
      <span id="f0904">The great wall of vegetation, an exuberant and entangled mass of trunks, branches, leaves, boughs, festoons, motionless in the moonlight, was like a rioting invasion of soundless life, a rolling wave of plants, piled up, crested, ready to topple over the creek, to sweep every little man of us out of his little existence. </span>
      <span id="f0905">And it moved not. </span>
      <span id="f0906">A deadened burst of mighty splashes and snorts reached us from afar, as though an ichthyosaurus had been taking a bath of glitter in the great river. </span>
      <span id="f0907">&#39;After all,&#39; said the boiler-maker in a reasonable tone, &#39;why shouldn&#39;t we get the rivets?&#39; Why not, indeed! </span>
      <span id="f0908">I did not know of any reason why we shouldn&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f0909">&#39;They&#39;ll come in three weeks,&#39; I said confidently.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0910">&#34;But they didn&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f0911">Instead of rivets there came an invasion, an infliction, a visitation. </span>
      <span id="f0912">It came in sections during the next three weeks, each section headed by a donkey carrying a white man in new clothes and tan shoes, bowing from that elevation right and left to the impressed pilgrims. </span>
      <span id="f0913">A quarrelsome band of footsore sulky niggers trod on the heels of the donkeys; a lot of tents, camp-stools, tin boxes, white cases, brown bales would be shot down in the courtyard, and the air of mystery would deepen a little over the muddle of the station. </span>
      <span id="f0914">Five such installments came, with their absurd air of disorderly flight with the loot of innumerable outfit shops and provision stores, that, one would think, they were lugging, after a raid, into the wilderness for equitable division. </span>
      <span id="f0915">It was an inextricable mess of things decent in themselves but that human folly made look like the spoils of thieving.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0916">&#34;This devoted band called itself the Eldorado Exploring Expedition, and I believe they were sworn to secrecy. </span>
      <span id="f0917">Their talk, however, was the talk of sordid buccaneers: it was reckless without hardihood, greedy without audacity, and cruel without courage; there was not an atom of foresight or of serious intention in the whole batch of them, and they did not seem aware these things are wanted for the work of the world. </span>
      <span id="f0918">To tear treasure out of the bowels of the land was their desire, with no more moral purpose at the back of it than there is in burglars breaking into a safe. </span>
      <span id="f0919">Who paid the expenses of the noble enterprise I don&#39;t know; but the uncle of our manager was leader of that lot.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0920">&#34;In exterior he resembled a butcher in a poor neighborhood, and his eyes had a look of sleepy cunning. </span>
      <span id="f0921">He carried his fat paunch with ostentation on his short legs, and during the time his gang infested the station spoke to no one but his nephew. </span>
      <span id="f0922">You could see these two roaming about all day long with their heads close together in an everlasting confab.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0923">&#34;I had given up worrying myself about the rivets. </span>
      <span id="f0924">One&#39;s capacity for that kind of folly is more limited than you would suppose. </span>
      <span id="f0925">I said Hang!--and let things slide. </span>
      <span id="f0926">I had plenty of time for meditation, and now and then I would give some thought to Kurtz. </span>
      <span id="f0927">I wasn&#39;t very interested in him. </span>
      <span id="f0928">No. </span>
      <span id="f0929">Still, I was curious to see whether this man, who had come out equipped with moral ideas of some sort, would climb to the top after all, and how he would set about his work when there.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>