<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Chapter II. Part 1</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0930">Chapter II. Part 1</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0932">&#34;One evening as I was lying flat on the deck of my steamboat, I heard voices approaching--and there were the nephew and the uncle strolling along the bank. </span>
      <span id="f0933">I laid my head on my arm again, and had nearly lost myself in a doze, when somebody said in my ear, as it were: &#39;I am as harmless as a little child, but I don&#39;t like to be dictated to. </span>
      <span id="f0934">Am I the manager--or am I not? </span>
      <span id="f0935">I was ordered to send him there. </span>
      <span id="f0936">It&#39;s incredible.&#39; . </span>
      <span id="f0937">. </span>
      <span id="f0938">. </span>
      <span id="f0939">I became aware that the two were standing on the shore alongside the forepart of the steamboat, just below my head. </span>
      <span id="f0940">I did not move; it did not occur to me to move: I was sleepy. </span>
      <span id="f0941">&#39;It _is_ unpleasant,&#39; grunted the uncle. </span>
      <span id="f0942">&#39;He has asked the Administration to be sent there,&#39; said the other, &#39;with the idea of showing what he could do; and I was instructed accordingly. </span>
      <span id="f0943">Look at the influence that man must have. </span>
      <span id="f0944">Is it not frightful?&#39; They both agreed it was frightful, then made several bizarre remarks: &#39;Make rain and fine weather--one man--the Council--by the nose&#39;--bits of absurd sentences that got the better of my drowsiness, so that I had pretty near the whole of my wits about me when the uncle said, &#39;The climate may do away with this difficulty for you. </span>
      <span id="f0945">Is he alone there?&#39; &#39;Yes,&#39; answered the manager; &#39;he sent his assistant down the river with a note to me in these terms: &#34;Clear this poor devil out of the country, and don&#39;t bother sending more of that sort. </span>
      <span id="f0946">I had rather be alone than have the kind of men you can dispose of with me.&#34; It was more than a year ago. </span>
      <span id="f0947">Can you imagine such impudence!&#39; &#39;Anything since then?&#39; asked the other, hoarsely. </span>
      <span id="f0948">&#39;Ivory,&#39; jerked the nephew; &#39;lots of it--prime sort--lots--most annoying, from him.&#39; &#39;And with that?&#39; questioned the heavy rumble. </span>
      <span id="f0949">&#39;Invoice,&#39; was the reply fired out, so to speak. </span>
      <span id="f0950">Then silence. </span>
      <span id="f0951">They had been talking about Kurtz.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0952">&#34;I was broad awake by this time, but, lying perfectly at ease, remained still, having no inducement to change my position. </span>
      <span id="f0953">&#39;How did that ivory come all this way?&#39; growled the elder man, who seemed very vexed. </span>
      <span id="f0954">The other explained that it had come with a fleet of canoes in charge of an English half-caste clerk Kurtz had with him; that Kurtz had apparently intended to return himself, the station being by that time bare of goods and stores, but after coming three hundred miles, had suddenly decided to go back, which he started to do alone in a small dug-out with four paddlers, leaving the half-caste to continue down the river with the ivory. </span>
      <span id="f0955">The two fellows there seemed astounded at anybody attempting such a thing. </span>
      <span id="f0956">They were at a loss for an adequate motive. </span>
      <span id="f0957">As to me, I seemed to see Kurtz for the first time. </span>
      <span id="f0958">It was a distinct glimpse: the dug-out, four paddling savages, and the lone white man turning his back suddenly on the headquarters, on relief, on thoughts of home--perhaps; setting his face towards the depths of the wilderness, towards his empty and desolate station. </span>
      <span id="f0959">I did not know the motive. </span>
      <span id="f0960">Perhaps he was just simply a fine fellow who stuck to his work for its own sake. </span>
      <span id="f0961">His name, you understand, had not been pronounced once. </span>
      <span id="f0962">He was &#39;that man.&#39; The half-caste, who, as far as I could see, had conducted a difficult trip with great prudence and pluck, was invariably alluded to as &#39;that scoundrel.&#39; The &#39;scoundrel&#39; had reported that the &#39;man&#39; had been very ill--had recovered imperfectly. </span>
      <span id="f0963">. </span>
      <span id="f0964">. </span>
      <span id="f0965">. </span>
      <span id="f0966">The two below me moved away then a few paces, and strolled back and forth at some little distance. </span>
      <span id="f0967">I heard: &#39;Military post--doctor--two hundred miles--quite alone now--unavoidable delays--nine months--no news--strange rumors.&#39; They approached again, just as the manager was saying, &#39;No one, as far as I know, unless a species of wandering trader--a pestilential fellow, snapping ivory from the natives.&#39; Who was it they were talking about now? </span>
      <span id="f0968">I gathered in snatches that this was some man supposed to be in Kurtz&#39;s district, and of whom the manager did not approve. </span>
      <span id="f0969">&#39;We will not be free from unfair competition till one of these fellows is hanged for an example,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f0970">&#39;Certainly,&#39; grunted the other; &#39;get him hanged! </span>
      <span id="f0971">Why not? </span>
      <span id="f0972">Anything--anything can be done in this country. </span>
      <span id="f0973">That&#39;s what I say; nobody here, you understand, _here_, can endanger your position. </span>
      <span id="f0974">And why? </span>
      <span id="f0975">You stand the climate--you outlast them all. </span>
      <span id="f0976">The danger is in Europe; but there before I left I took care to--&#39; They moved off and whispered, then their voices rose again. </span>
      <span id="f0977">&#39;The extraordinary series of delays is not my fault. </span>
      <span id="f0978">I did my possible.&#39; The fat man sighed, &#39;Very sad.&#39; &#39;And the pestiferous absurdity of his talk,&#39; continued the other; &#39;he bothered me enough when he was here. </span>
      <span id="f0979">&#34;Each station should be like a beacon on the road towards better things, a center for trade of course, but also for humanizing, improving, instructing.&#34; Conceive you--that ass! </span>
      <span id="f0980">And he wants to be manager! </span>
      <span id="f0981">No, it&#39;s--&#39; Here he got choked by excessive indignation, and I lifted my head the least bit. </span>
      <span id="f0982">I was surprised to see how near they were--right under me. </span>
      <span id="f0983">I could have spat upon their hats. </span>
      <span id="f0984">They were looking on the ground, absorbed in thought. </span>
      <span id="f0985">The manager was switching his leg with a slender twig: his sagacious relative lifted his head. </span>
      <span id="f0986">&#39;You have been well since you came out this time?&#39; he asked. </span>
      <span id="f0987">The other gave a start. </span>
      <span id="f0988">&#39;Who? </span>
      <span id="f0989">I? </span>
      <span id="f0990">Oh! </span>
      <span id="f0991">Like a charm--like a charm. </span>
      <span id="f0992">But the rest--oh, my goodness! </span>
      <span id="f0993">All sick. </span>
      <span id="f0994">They die so quick, too, that I haven&#39;t the time to send them out of the country--it&#39;s incredible!&#39; &#39;H&#39;m. </span>
      <span id="f0995">Just so,&#39; grunted the uncle. </span>
      <span id="f0996">&#39;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f0997">my boy, trust to this--I say, trust to this.&#39; I saw him extend his short flipper of an arm for a gesture that took in the forest, the creek, the mud, the river,--seemed to beckon with a dishonoring flourish before the sunlit face of the land a treacherous appeal to the lurking death, to the hidden evil, to the profound darkness of its heart. </span>
      <span id="f0998">It was so startling that I leaped to my feet and looked back at the edge of the forest, as though I had expected an answer of some sort to that black display of confidence. </span>
      <span id="f0999">You know the foolish notions that come to one sometimes. </span>
      <span id="f1000">The high stillness confronted these two figures with its ominous patience, waiting for the passing away of a fantastic invasion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1001">&#34;They swore aloud together--out of sheer fright, I believe--then pretending not to know anything of my existence, turned back to the station. </span>
      <span id="f1002">The sun was low; and leaning forward side by side, they seemed to be tugging painfully uphill their two ridiculous shadows of unequal length, that trailed behind them slowly over the tall grass without bending a single blade.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1003">&#34;In a few days the Eldorado Expedition went into the patient wilderness, that closed upon it as the sea closes over a diver. </span>
      <span id="f1004">Long afterwards the news came that all the donkeys were dead. </span>
      <span id="f1005">I know nothing as to the fate of the less valuable animals. </span>
      <span id="f1006">They, no doubt, like the rest of us, found what they deserved. </span>
      <span id="f1007">I did not inquire. </span>
      <span id="f1008">I was then rather excited at the prospect of meeting Kurtz very soon. </span>
      <span id="f1009">When I say very soon I mean it comparatively. </span>
      <span id="f1010">It was just two months from the day we left the creek when we came to the bank below Kurtz&#39;s station.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1011">&#34;Going up that river was like traveling back to the earliest beginnings of the world, when vegetation rioted on the earth and the big trees were kings. </span>
      <span id="f1012">An empty stream, a great silence, an impenetrable forest. </span>
      <span id="f1013">The air was warm, thick, heavy, sluggish. </span>
      <span id="f1014">There was no joy in the brilliance of sunshine. </span>
      <span id="f1015">The long stretches of the waterway ran on, deserted, into the gloom of overshadowed distances. </span>
      <span id="f1016">On silvery sandbanks hippos and alligators sunned themselves side by side. </span>
      <span id="f1017">The broadening waters flowed through a mob of wooded islands; you lost your way on that river as you would in a desert, and butted all day long against shoals, trying to find the channel, till you thought yourself bewitched and cut off for ever from everything you had known once--somewhere--far away--in another existence perhaps. </span>
      <span id="f1018">There were moments when one&#39;s past came back to one, as it will sometimes when you have not a moment to spare to yourself; but it came in the shape of an unrestful and noisy dream, remembered with wonder amongst the overwhelming realities of this strange world of plants, and water, and silence. </span>
      <span id="f1019">And this stillness of life did not in the least resemble a peace. </span>
      <span id="f1020">It was the stillness of an implacable force brooding over an inscrutable intention. </span>
      <span id="f1021">It looked at you with a vengeful aspect. </span>
      <span id="f1022">I got used to it afterwards; I did not see it any more; I had no time. </span>
      <span id="f1023">I had to keep guessing at the channel; I had to discern, mostly by inspiration, the signs of hidden banks; I watched for sunken stones; I was learning to clap my teeth smartly before my heart flew out, when I shaved by a fluke some infernal sly old snag that would have ripped the life out of the tin-pot steamboat and drowned all the pilgrims; I had to keep a look-out for the signs of dead wood we could cut up in the night for next day&#39;s steaming. </span>
      <span id="f1024">When you have to attend to things of that sort, to the mere incidents of the surface, the reality--the reality, I tell you--fades. </span>
      <span id="f1025">The inner truth is hidden--luckily, luckily. </span>
      <span id="f1026">But I felt it all the same; I felt often its mysterious stillness watching me at my monkey tricks, just as it watches you fellows performing on your respective tight-ropes for--what is it? </span>
      <span id="f1027">half-a-crown a tumble--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1028">&#34;Try to be civil, Marlow,&#34; growled a voice, and I knew there was at least one listener awake besides myself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1029">&#34;I beg your pardon. </span>
      <span id="f1030">I forgot the heartache which makes up the rest of the price. </span>
      <span id="f1031">And indeed what does the price matter, if the trick be well done? </span>
      <span id="f1032">You do your tricks very well. </span>
      <span id="f1033">And I didn&#39;t do badly either, since I managed not to sink that steamboat on my first trip. </span>
      <span id="f1034">It&#39;s a wonder to me yet. </span>
      <span id="f1035">Imagine a blindfolded man set to drive a van over a bad road. </span>
      <span id="f1036">I sweated and shivered over that business considerably, I can tell you. </span>
      <span id="f1037">After all, for a seaman, to scrape the bottom of the thing that&#39;s supposed to float all the time under his care is the unpardonable sin. </span>
      <span id="f1038">No one may know of it, but you never forget the thump--eh? </span>
      <span id="f1039">A blow on the very heart. </span>
      <span id="f1040">You remember it, you dream of it, you wake up at night and think of it--years after--and go hot and cold all over. </span>
      <span id="f1041">I don&#39;t pretend to say that steamboat floated all the time. </span>
      <span id="f1042">More than once she had to wade for a bit, with twenty cannibals splashing around and pushing. </span>
      <span id="f1043">We had enlisted some of these chaps on the way for a crew. </span>
      <span id="f1044">Fine fellows--cannibals--in their place. </span>
      <span id="f1045">They were men one could work with, and I am grateful to them. </span>
      <span id="f1046">And, after all, they did not eat each other before my face: they had brought along a provision of hippo-meat which went rotten, and made the mystery of the wilderness stink in my nostrils. </span>
      <span id="f1047">Phoo! </span>
      <span id="f1048">I can sniff it now. </span>
      <span id="f1049">I had the manager on board and three or four pilgrims with their staves--all complete. </span>
      <span id="f1050">Sometimes we came upon a station close by the bank, clinging to the skirts of the unknown, and the white men rushing out of a tumble-down hovel, with great gestures of joy and surprise and welcome, seemed very strange,--had the appearance of being held there captive by a spell. </span>
      <span id="f1051">The word ivory would ring in the air for a while--and on we went again into the silence, along empty reaches, round the still bends, between the high walls of our winding way, reverberating in hollow claps the ponderous beat of the stern-wheel. </span>
      <span id="f1052">Trees, trees, millions of trees, massive, immense, running up high; and at their foot, hugging the bank against the stream, crept the little begrimed steamboat, like a sluggish beetle crawling on the floor of a lofty portico. </span>
      <span id="f1053">It made you feel very small, very lost, and yet it was not altogether depressing, that feeling. </span>
      <span id="f1054">After all, if you were small, the grimy beetle crawled on--which was just what you wanted it to do. </span>
      <span id="f1055">Where the pilgrims imagined it crawled to I don&#39;t know. </span>
      <span id="f1056">To some place where they expected to get something, I bet! </span>
      <span id="f1057">For me it crawled toward Kurtz--exclusively; but when the steam-pipes started leaking we crawled very slow. </span>
      <span id="f1058">The reaches opened before us and closed behind, as if the forest had stepped leisurely across the water to bar the way for our return. </span>
      <span id="f1059">We penetrated deeper and deeper into the heart of darkness. </span>
      <span id="f1060">It was very quiet there. </span>
      <span id="f1061">At night sometimes the roll of drums behind the curtain of trees would run up the river and remain sustained faintly, as if hovering in the air high over our heads, till the first break of day. </span>
      <span id="f1062">Whether it meant war, peace, or prayer we could not tell. </span>
      <span id="f1063">The dawns were heralded by the descent of a chill stillness; the woodcutters slept, their fires burned low; the snapping of a twig would make you start. </span>
      <span id="f1064">We were wanderers on a prehistoric earth, on an earth that wore the aspect of an unknown planet. </span>
      <span id="f1065">We could have fancied ourselves the first of men taking possession of an accursed inheritance, to be subdued at the cost of profound anguish and of excessive toil. </span>
      <span id="f1066">But suddenly, as we struggled round a bend, there would be a glimpse of rush walls, of peaked grass-roofs, a burst of yells, a whirl of black limbs, a mass of hands clapping, of feet stamping, of bodies swaying, of eyes rolling, under the droop of heavy and motionless foliage. </span>
      <span id="f1067">The steamer toiled along slowly on the edge of a black and incomprehensible frenzy. </span>
      <span id="f1068">The prehistoric man was cursing us, praying to us, welcoming us--who could tell? </span>
      <span id="f1069">We were cut off from the comprehension of our surroundings; we glided past like phantoms, wondering and secretly appalled, as sane men would be before an enthusiastic outbreak in a madhouse. </span>
      <span id="f1070">We could not understand, because we were too far and could not remember, because we were traveling in the night of first ages, of those ages that are gone, leaving hardly a sign--and no memories.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1071">&#34;The earth seemed unearthly. </span>
      <span id="f1072">We are accustomed to look upon the shackled form of a conquered monster, but there--there you could look at a thing monstrous and free. </span>
      <span id="f1073">It was unearthly, and the men were--No, they were not inhuman. </span>
      <span id="f1074">Well, you know, that was the worst of it--this suspicion of their not being inhuman. </span>
      <span id="f1075">It would come slowly to one. </span>
      <span id="f1076">They howled, and leaped, and spun, and made horrid faces; but what thrilled you was just the thought of their humanity--like yours--the thought of your remote kinship with this wild and passionate uproar. </span>
      <span id="f1077">Ugly. </span>
      <span id="f1078">Yes, it was ugly enough; but if you were man enough you would admit to yourself that there was in you just the faintest trace of a response to the terrible frankness of that noise, a dim suspicion of there being a meaning in it which you--you so remote from the night of first ages--could comprehend. </span>
      <span id="f1079">And why not? </span>
      <span id="f1080">The mind of man is capable of anything--because everything is in it, all the past as well as all the future. </span>
      <span id="f1081">What was there after all? </span>
      <span id="f1082">Joy, fear, sorrow, devotion, valor, rage--who can tell?--but truth--truth stripped of its cloak of time. </span>
      <span id="f1083">Let the fool gape and shudder--the man knows, and can look on without a wink. </span>
      <span id="f1084">But he must at least be as much of a man as these on the shore. </span>
      <span id="f1085">He must meet that truth with his own true stuff--with his own inborn strength. </span>
      <span id="f1086">Principles? </span>
      <span id="f1087">Principles won&#39;t do. </span>
      <span id="f1088">Acquisitions, clothes, pretty rags--rags that would fly off at the first good shake. </span>
      <span id="f1089">No; you want a deliberate belief. </span>
      <span id="f1090">An appeal to me in this fiendish row--is there? </span>
      <span id="f1091">Very well; I hear; I admit, but I have a voice too, and for good or evil mine is the speech that cannot be silenced. </span>
      <span id="f1092">Of course, a fool, what with sheer fright and fine sentiments, is always safe. </span>
      <span id="f1093">Who&#39;s that grunting? </span>
      <span id="f1094">You wonder I didn&#39;t go ashore for a howl and a dance? </span>
      <span id="f1095">Well, no--I didn&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f1096">Fine sentiments, you say? </span>
      <span id="f1097">Fine sentiments, be hanged! </span>
      <span id="f1098">I had no time. </span>
      <span id="f1099">I had to mess about with white-lead and strips of woolen blanket helping to put bandages on those leaky steam-pipes--I tell you. </span>
      <span id="f1100">I had to watch the steering, and circumvent those snags, and get the tin-pot along by hook or by crook. </span>
      <span id="f1101">There was surface-truth enough in these things to save a wiser man. </span>
      <span id="f1102">And between whiles I had to look after the savage who was fireman. </span>
      <span id="f1103">He was an improved specimen; he could fire up a vertical boiler. </span>
      <span id="f1104">He was there below me, and, upon my word, to look at him was as edifying as seeing a dog in a parody of breeches and a feather hat, walking on his hind-legs. </span>
      <span id="f1105">A few months of training had done for that really fine chap. </span>
      <span id="f1106">He squinted at the steam-gauge and at the water-gauge with an evident effort of intrepidity--and he had filed teeth too, the poor devil, and the wool of his pate shaved into queer patterns, and three ornamental scars on each of his cheeks. </span>
      <span id="f1107">He ought to have been clapping his hands and stamping his feet on the bank, instead of which he was hard at work, a thrall to strange witchcraft, full of improving knowledge. </span>
      <span id="f1108">He was useful because he had been instructed; and what he knew was this--that should the water in that transparent thing disappear, the evil spirit inside the boiler would get angry through the greatness of his thirst, and take a terrible vengeance. </span>
      <span id="f1109">So he sweated and fired up and watched the glass fearfully (with an impromptu charm, made of rags, tied to his arm, and a piece of polished bone, as big as a watch, stuck flatways through his lower lip), while the wooded banks slipped past us slowly, the short noise was left behind, the interminable miles of silence--and we crept on, towards Kurtz. </span>
      <span id="f1110">But the snags were thick, the water was treacherous and shallow, the boiler seemed indeed to have a sulky devil in it, and thus neither that fireman nor I had any time to peer into our creepy thoughts.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1111">&#34;Some fifty miles below the Inner Station we came upon a hut of reeds, an inclined and melancholy pole, with the unrecognizable tatters of what had been a flag of some sort flying from it, and a neatly stacked woodpile. </span>
      <span id="f1112">This was unexpected. </span>
      <span id="f1113">We came to the bank, and on the stack of firewood found a flat piece of board with some faded pencil-writing on it. </span>
      <span id="f1114">When deciphered it said: &#39;Wood for you. </span>
      <span id="f1115">Hurry up. </span>
      <span id="f1116">Approach cautiously.&#39; There was a signature, but it was illegible--not Kurtz--a much longer word. </span>
      <span id="f1117">&#39;Hurry up.&#39; Where? </span>
      <span id="f1118">Up the river? </span>
      <span id="f1119">&#39;Approach cautiously.&#39; We had not done so. </span>
      <span id="f1120">But the warning could not have been meant for the place where it could be only found after approach. </span>
      <span id="f1121">Something was wrong above. </span>
      <span id="f1122">But what--and how much? </span>
      <span id="f1123">That was the question. </span>
      <span id="f1124">We commented adversely upon the imbecility of that telegraphic style. </span>
      <span id="f1125">The bush around said nothing, and would not let us look very far, either. </span>
      <span id="f1126">A torn curtain of red twill hung in the doorway of the hut, and flapped sadly in our faces. </span>
      <span id="f1127">The dwelling was dismantled; but we could see a white man had lived there not very long ago. </span>
      <span id="f1128">There remained a rude table--a plank on two posts; a heap of rubbish reposed in a dark corner, and by the door I picked up a book. </span>
      <span id="f1129">It had lost its covers, and the pages had been thumbed into a state of extremely dirty softness; but the back had been lovingly stitched afresh with white cotton thread, which looked clean yet. </span>
      <span id="f1130">It was an extraordinary find. </span>
      <span id="f1131">Its title was, &#39;An Inquiry into some Points of Seamanship,&#39; by a man Tower, Towson--some such name--Master in his Majesty&#39;s Navy. </span>
      <span id="f1132">The matter looked dreary reading enough, with illustrative diagrams and repulsive tables of figures, and the copy was sixty years old. </span>
      <span id="f1133">I handled this amazing antiquity with the greatest possible tenderness, lest it should dissolve in my hands. </span>
      <span id="f1134">Within, Towson or Towser was inquiring earnestly into the breaking strain of ships&#39; chains and tackle, and other such matters. </span>
      <span id="f1135">Not a very enthralling book; but at the first glance you could see there a singleness of intention, an honest concern for the right way of going to work, which made these humble pages, thought out so many years ago, luminous with another than a professional light. </span>
      <span id="f1136">The simple old sailor, with his talk of chains and purchases, made me forget the jungle and the pilgrims in a delicious sensation of having come upon something unmistakably real. </span>
      <span id="f1137">Such a book being there was wonderful enough; but still more astounding were the notes penciled in the margin, and plainly referring to the text. </span>
      <span id="f1138">I couldn&#39;t believe my eyes! </span>
      <span id="f1139">They were in cipher! </span>
      <span id="f1140">Yes, it looked like cipher. </span>
      <span id="f1141">Fancy a man lugging with him a book of that description into this nowhere and studying it--and making notes--in cipher at that! </span>
      <span id="f1142">It was an extravagant mystery.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1143">&#34;I had been dimly aware for some time of a worrying noise, and when I lifted my eyes I saw the wood-pile was gone, and the manager, aided by all the pilgrims, was shouting at me from the river-side. </span>
      <span id="f1144">I slipped the book into my pocket. </span>
      <span id="f1145">I assure you to leave off reading was like tearing myself away from the shelter of an old and solid friendship.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1146">&#34;I started the lame engine ahead. </span>
      <span id="f1147">&#39;It must be this miserable trader--this intruder,&#39; exclaimed the manager, looking back malevolently at the place we had left. </span>
      <span id="f1148">&#39;He must be English,&#39; I said. </span>
      <span id="f1149">&#39;It will not save him from getting into trouble if he is not careful,&#39; muttered the manager darkly. </span>
      <span id="f1150">I observed with assumed innocence that no man was safe from trouble in this world.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1151">&#34;The current was more rapid now, the steamer seemed at her last gasp, the stern-wheel flopped languidly, and I caught myself listening on tiptoe for the next beat of the boat, for in sober truth I expected the wretched thing to give up every moment. </span>
      <span id="f1152">It was like watching the last flickers of a life. </span>
      <span id="f1153">But still we crawled. </span>
      <span id="f1154">Sometimes I would pick out a tree a little way ahead to measure our progress towards Kurtz by, but I lost it invariably before we got abreast. </span>
      <span id="f1155">To keep the eyes so long on one thing was too much for human patience. </span>
      <span id="f1156">The manager displayed a beautiful resignation. </span>
      <span id="f1157">I fretted and fumed and took to arguing with myself whether or no I would talk openly with Kurtz; but before I could come to any conclusion it occurred to me that my speech or my silence, indeed any action of mine, would be a mere futility. </span>
      <span id="f1158">What did it matter what anyone knew or ignored? </span>
      <span id="f1159">What did it matter who was manager? </span>
      <span id="f1160">One gets sometimes such a flash of insight. </span>
      <span id="f1161">The essentials of this affair lay deep under the surface, beyond my reach, and beyond my power of meddling.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1162">&#34;Towards the evening of the second day we judged ourselves about eight miles from Kurtz&#39;s station. </span>
      <span id="f1163">I wanted to push on; but the manager looked grave, and told me the navigation up there was so dangerous that it would be advisable, the sun being very low already, to wait where we were till next morning. </span>
      <span id="f1164">Moreover, he pointed out that if the warning to approach cautiously were to be followed, we must approach in daylight--not at dusk, or in the dark. </span>
      <span id="f1165">This was sensible enough. </span>
      <span id="f1166">Eight miles meant nearly three hours&#39; steaming for us, and I could also see suspicious ripples at the upper end of the reach. </span>
      <span id="f1167">Nevertheless, I was annoyed beyond expression at the delay, and most unreasonably too, since one night more could not matter much after so many months. </span>
      <span id="f1168">As we had plenty of wood, and caution was the word, I brought up in the middle of the stream. </span>
      <span id="f1169">The reach was narrow, straight, with high sides like a railway cutting. </span>
      <span id="f1170">The dusk came gliding into it long before the sun had set. </span>
      <span id="f1171">The current ran smooth and swift, but a dumb immobility sat on the banks. </span>
      <span id="f1172">The living trees, lashed together by the creepers and every living bush of the undergrowth, might have been changed into stone, even to the slenderest twig, to the lightest leaf. </span>
      <span id="f1173">It was not sleep--it seemed unnatural, like a state of trance. </span>
      <span id="f1174">Not the faintest sound of any kind could be heard. </span>
      <span id="f1175">You looked on amazed, and began to suspect yourself of being deaf--then the night came suddenly, and struck you blind as well. </span>
      <span id="f1176">About three in the morning some large fish leaped, and the loud splash made me jump as though a gun had been fired. </span>
      <span id="f1177">When the sun rose there was a white fog, very warm and clammy, and more blinding than the night. </span>
      <span id="f1178">It did not shift or drive; it was just there, standing all round you like something solid. </span>
      <span id="f1179">At eight or nine, perhaps, it lifted as a shutter lifts. </span>
      <span id="f1180">We had a glimpse of the towering multitude of trees, of the immense matted jungle, with the blazing little ball of the sun hanging over it--all perfectly still--and then the white shutter came down again, smoothly, as if sliding in greased grooves. </span>
      <span id="f1181">I ordered the chain, which we had begun to heave in, to be paid out again. </span>
      <span id="f1182">Before it stopped running with a muffled rattle, a cry, a very loud cry, as of infinite desolation, soared slowly in the opaque air. </span>
      <span id="f1183">It ceased. </span>
      <span id="f1184">A complaining clamor, modulated in savage discords, filled our ears. </span>
      <span id="f1185">The sheer unexpectedness of it made my hair stir under my cap. </span>
      <span id="f1186">I don&#39;t know how it struck the others: to me it seemed as though the mist itself had screamed, so suddenly, and apparently from all sides at once, did this tumultuous and mournful uproar arise. </span>
      <span id="f1187">It culminated in a hurried outbreak of almost intolerably excessive shrieking, which stopped short, leaving us stiffened in a variety of silly attitudes, and obstinately listening to the nearly as appalling and excessive silence. </span>
      <span id="f1188">&#39;Good God! </span>
      <span id="f1189">What is the meaning--?&#39; stammered at my elbow one of the pilgrims,--a little fat man, with sandy hair and red whiskers, who wore side-spring boots, and pink pyjamas tucked into his socks. </span>
      <span id="f1190">Two others remained open-mouthed a whole minute, then dashed into the little cabin, to rush out incontinently and stand darting scared glances, with Winchesters at &#39;ready&#39; in their hands. </span>
      <span id="f1191">What we could see was just the steamer we were on, her outlines blurred as though she had been on the point of dissolving, and a misty strip of water, perhaps two feet broad, around her--and that was all. </span>
      <span id="f1192">The rest of the world was nowhere, as far as our eyes and ears were concerned. </span>
      <span id="f1193">Just nowhere. </span>
      <span id="f1194">Gone, disappeared; swept off without leaving a whisper or a shadow behind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1195">&#34;I went forward, and ordered the chain to be hauled in short, so as to be ready to trip the anchor and move the steamboat at once if necessary. </span>
      <span id="f1196">&#39;Will they attack?&#39; whispered an awed voice. </span>
      <span id="f1197">&#39;We will all be butchered in this fog,&#39; murmured another. </span>
      <span id="f1198">The faces twitched with the strain, the hands trembled slightly, the eyes forgot to wink. </span>
      <span id="f1199">It was very curious to see the contrast of expressions of the white men and of the black fellows of our crew, who were as much strangers to that part of the river as we, though their homes were only eight hundred miles away. </span>
      <span id="f1200">The whites, of course greatly discomposed, had besides a curious look of being painfully shocked by such an outrageous row. </span>
      <span id="f1201">The others had an alert, naturally interested expression; but their faces were essentially quiet, even those of the one or two who grinned as they hauled at the chain. </span>
      <span id="f1202">Several exchanged short, grunting phrases, which seemed to settle the matter to their satisfaction. </span>
      <span id="f1203">Their headman, a young, broad-chested black, severely draped in dark-blue fringed cloths, with fierce nostrils and his hair all done up artfully in oily ringlets, stood near me. </span>
      <span id="f1204">&#39;Aha!&#39; I said, just for good fellowship&#39;s sake. </span>
      <span id="f1205">&#39;Catch &#39;im,&#39; he snapped, with a bloodshot widening of his eyes and a flash of sharp teeth--&#39;catch &#39;im. </span>
      <span id="f1206">Give &#39;im to us.&#39; &#39;To you, eh?&#39; I asked; &#39;what would you do with them?&#39; &#39;Eat &#39;im!&#39; he said curtly, and, leaning his elbow on the rail, looked out into the fog in a dignified and profoundly pensive attitude. </span>
      <span id="f1207">I would no doubt have been properly horrified, had it not occurred to me that he and his chaps must be very hungry: that they must have been growing increasingly hungry for at least this month past. </span>
      <span id="f1208">They had been engaged for six months (I don&#39;t think a single one of them had any clear idea of time, as we at the end of countless ages have. </span>
      <span id="f1209">They still belonged to the beginnings of time--had no inherited experience to teach them as it were), and of course, as long as there was a piece of paper written over in accordance with some farcical law or other made down the river, it didn&#39;t enter anybody&#39;s head to trouble how they would live. </span>
      <span id="f1210">Certainly they had brought with them some rotten hippo-meat, which couldn&#39;t have lasted very long, anyway, even if the pilgrims hadn&#39;t, in the midst of a shocking hullabaloo, thrown a considerable quantity of it overboard. </span>
      <span id="f1211">It looked like a high-handed proceeding; but it was really a case of legitimate self-defense. </span>
      <span id="f1212">You can&#39;t breathe dead hippo waking, sleeping, and eating, and at the same time keep your precarious grip on existence. </span>
      <span id="f1213">Besides that, they had given them every week three pieces of brass wire, each about nine inches long; and the theory was they were to buy their provisions with that currency in river-side villages. </span>
      <span id="f1214">You can see how _that_ worked. </span>
      <span id="f1215">There were either no villages, or the people were hostile, or the director, who like the rest of us fed out of tins, with an occasional old he-goat thrown in, didn&#39;t want to stop the steamer for some more or less recondite reason. </span>
      <span id="f1216">So, unless they swallowed the wire itself, or made loops of it to snare the fishes with, I don&#39;t see what good their extravagant salary could be to them. </span>
      <span id="f1217">I must say it was paid with a regularity worthy of a large and honorable trading company. </span>
      <span id="f1218">For the rest, the only thing to eat--though it didn&#39;t look eatable in the least--I saw in their possession was a few lumps of some stuff like half-cooked dough, of a dirty lavender color, they kept wrapped in leaves, and now and then swallowed a piece of, but so small that it seemed done more for the looks of the thing than for any serious purpose of sustenance. </span>
      <span id="f1219">Why in the name of all the gnawing devils of hunger they didn&#39;t go for us--they were thirty to five--and have a good tuck in for once, amazes me now when I think of it. </span>
      <span id="f1220">They were big powerful men, with not much capacity to weigh the consequences, with courage, with strength, even yet, though their skins were no longer glossy and their muscles no longer hard. </span>
      <span id="f1221">And I saw that something restraining, one of those human secrets that baffle probability, had come into play there. </span>
      <span id="f1222">I looked at them with a swift quickening of interest--not because it occurred to me I might be eaten by them before very long, though I own to you that just then I perceived--in a new light, as it were--how unwholesome the pilgrims looked, and I hoped, yes, I positively hoped, that my aspect was not so--what shall I say?--so--unappetizing: a touch of fantastic vanity which fitted well with the dream-sensation that pervaded all my days at that time. </span>
      <span id="f1223">Perhaps I had a little fever too. </span>
      <span id="f1224">One can&#39;t live with one&#39;s finger everlastingly on one&#39;s pulse. </span>
      <span id="f1225">I had often &#39;a little fever,&#39; or a little touch of other things--the playful paw-strokes of the wilderness, the preliminary trifling before the more serious onslaught which came in due course. </span>
      <span id="f1226">Yes; I looked at them as you would on any human being, with a curiosity of their impulses, motives, capacities, weaknesses, when brought to the test of an inexorable physical necessity. </span>
      <span id="f1227">Restraint! </span>
      <span id="f1228">What possible restraint? </span>
      <span id="f1229">Was it superstition, disgust, patience, fear--or some kind of primitive honor? </span>
      <span id="f1230">No fear can stand up to hunger, no patience can wear it out, disgust simply does not exist where hunger is; and as to superstition, beliefs, and what you may call principles, they are less than chaff in a breeze. </span>
      <span id="f1231">Don&#39;t you know the devilry of lingering starvation, its exasperating torment, its black thoughts, its somber and brooding ferocity? </span>
      <span id="f1232">Well, I do. </span>
      <span id="f1233">It takes a man all his inborn strength to fight hunger properly. </span>
      <span id="f1234">It&#39;s really easier to face bereavement, dishonor, and the perdition of one&#39;s soul--than this kind of prolonged hunger. </span>
      <span id="f1235">Sad, but true. </span>
      <span id="f1236">And these chaps too had no earthly reason for any kind of scruple. </span>
      <span id="f1237">Restraint! </span>
      <span id="f1238">I would just as soon have expected restraint from a hyena prowling amongst the corpses of a battlefield. </span>
      <span id="f1239">But there was the fact facing me--the fact dazzling, to be seen, like the foam on the depths of the sea, like a ripple on an unfathomable enigma, a mystery greater--when I thought of it--than the curious, inexplicable note of desperate grief in this savage clamor that had swept by us on the river-bank, behind the blind whiteness of the fog.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1240">&#34;Two pilgrims were quarreling in hurried whispers as to which bank. </span>
      <span id="f1241">&#39;Left.&#39; &#39;No, no; how can you? </span>
      <span id="f1242">Right, right, of course.&#39; &#39;It is very serious,&#39; said the manager&#39;s voice behind me; &#39;I would be desolated if anything should happen to Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1243">Kurtz before we came up.&#39; I looked at him, and had not the slightest doubt he was sincere. </span>
      <span id="f1244">He was just the kind of man who would wish to preserve appearances. </span>
      <span id="f1245">That was his restraint. </span>
      <span id="f1246">But when he muttered something about going on at once, I did not even take the trouble to answer him. </span>
      <span id="f1247">I knew, and he knew, that it was impossible. </span>
      <span id="f1248">Were we to let go our hold of the bottom, we would be absolutely in the air--in space. </span>
      <span id="f1249">We wouldn&#39;t be able to tell where we were going to--whether up or down stream, or across--till we fetched against one bank or the other,--and then we wouldn&#39;t know at first which it was. </span>
      <span id="f1250">Of course I made no move. </span>
      <span id="f1251">I had no mind for a smash-up. </span>
      <span id="f1252">You couldn&#39;t imagine a more deadly place for a shipwreck. </span>
      <span id="f1253">Whether drowned at once or not, we were sure to perish speedily in one way or another. </span>
      <span id="f1254">&#39;I authorize you to take all the risks,&#39; he said, after a short silence. </span>
      <span id="f1255">&#39;I refuse to take any,&#39; I said shortly; which was just the answer he expected, though its tone might have surprised him. </span>
      <span id="f1256">&#39;Well, I must defer to your judgment. </span>
      <span id="f1257">You are captain,&#39; he said, with marked civility. </span>
      <span id="f1258">I turned my shoulder to him in sign of my appreciation, and looked into the fog. </span>
      <span id="f1259">How long would it last? </span>
      <span id="f1260">It was the most hopeless look-out. </span>
      <span id="f1261">The approach to this Kurtz grubbing for ivory in the wretched bush was beset by as many dangers as though he had been an enchanted princess sleeping in a fabulous castle. </span>
      <span id="f1262">&#39;Will they attack, do you think?&#39; asked the manager, in a confidential tone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1263">&#34;I did not think they would attack, for several obvious reasons. </span>
      <span id="f1264">The thick fog was one. </span>
      <span id="f1265">If they left the bank in their canoes they would get lost in it, as we would be if we attempted to move. </span>
      <span id="f1266">Still, I had also judged the jungle of both banks quite impenetrable--and yet eyes were in it, eyes that had seen us. </span>
      <span id="f1267">The river-side bushes were certainly very thick; but the undergrowth behind was evidently penetrable. </span>
      <span id="f1268">However, during the short lift I had seen no canoes anywhere in the reach--certainly not abreast of the steamer. </span>
      <span id="f1269">But what made the idea of attack inconceivable to me was the nature of the noise--of the cries we had heard. </span>
      <span id="f1270">They had not the fierce character boding of immediate hostile intention. </span>
      <span id="f1271">Unexpected, wild, and violent as they had been, they had given me an irresistible impression of sorrow. </span>
      <span id="f1272">The glimpse of the steamboat had for some reason filled those savages with unrestrained grief. </span>
      <span id="f1273">The danger, if any, I expounded, was from our proximity to a great human passion let loose. </span>
      <span id="f1274">Even extreme grief may ultimately vent itself in violence--but more generally takes the form of apathy. </span>
      <span id="f1275">. </span>
      <span id="f1276">. </span>
      <span id="f1277">.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1278">&#34;You should have seen the pilgrims stare! </span>
      <span id="f1279">They had no heart to grin, or even to revile me; but I believe they thought me gone mad--with fright, maybe. </span>
      <span id="f1280">I delivered a regular lecture. </span>
      <span id="f1281">My dear boys, it was no good bothering. </span>
      <span id="f1282">Keep a look-out? </span>
      <span id="f1283">Well, you may guess I watched the fog for the signs of lifting as a cat watches a mouse; but for anything else our eyes were of no more use to us than if we had been buried miles deep in a heap of cotton-wool. </span>
      <span id="f1284">It felt like it too--choking, warm, stifling. </span>
      <span id="f1285">Besides, all I said, though it sounded extravagant, was absolutely true to fact. </span>
      <span id="f1286">What we afterwards alluded to as an attack was really an attempt at repulse. </span>
      <span id="f1287">The action was very far from being aggressive--it was not even defensive, in the usual sense: it was undertaken under the stress of desperation, and in its essence was purely protective.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1288">&#34;It developed itself, I should say, two hours after the fog lifted, and its commencement was at a spot, roughly speaking, about a mile and a half below Kurtz&#39;s station. </span>
      <span id="f1289">We had just floundered and flopped round a bend, when I saw an islet, a mere grassy hummock of bright green, in the middle of the stream. </span>
      <span id="f1290">It was the only thing of the kind; but as we opened the reach more, I perceived it was the head of a long sandbank, or rather of a chain of shallow patches stretching down the middle of the river. </span>
      <span id="f1291">They were discolored, just awash, and the whole lot was seen just under the water, exactly as a man&#39;s backbone is seen running down the middle of his back under the skin. </span>
      <span id="f1292">Now, as far as I did see, I could go to the right or to the left of this. </span>
      <span id="f1293">I didn&#39;t know either channel, of course. </span>
      <span id="f1294">The banks looked pretty well alike, the depth appeared the same; but as I had been informed the station was on the west side, I naturally headed for the western passage.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>