<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Chapter II. Part 2</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1295">Chapter II. Part 2</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1297">&#34;No sooner had we fairly entered it than I became aware it was much narrower than I had supposed. </span>
      <span id="f1298">To the left of us there was the long uninterrupted shoal, and to the right a high, steep bank heavily overgrown with bushes. </span>
      <span id="f1299">Above the bush the trees stood in serried ranks. </span>
      <span id="f1300">The twigs overhung the current thickly, and from distance to distance a large limb of some tree projected rigidly over the stream. </span>
      <span id="f1301">It was then well on in the afternoon, the face of the forest was gloomy, and a broad strip of shadow had already fallen on the water. </span>
      <span id="f1302">In this shadow we steamed up--very slowly, as you may imagine. </span>
      <span id="f1303">I sheered her well inshore--the water being deepest near the bank, as the sounding-pole informed me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1304">&#34;One of my hungry and forbearing friends was sounding in the bows just below me. </span>
      <span id="f1305">This steamboat was exactly like a decked scow. </span>
      <span id="f1306">On the deck there were two little teak-wood houses, with doors and windows. </span>
      <span id="f1307">The boiler was in the fore-end, and the machinery right astern. </span>
      <span id="f1308">Over the whole there was a light roof, supported on stanchions. </span>
      <span id="f1309">The funnel projected through that roof, and in front of the funnel a small cabin built of light planks served for a pilot-house. </span>
      <span id="f1310">It contained a couch, two camp-stools, a loaded Martini-Henry leaning in one corner, a tiny table, and the steering-wheel. </span>
      <span id="f1311">It had a wide door in front and a broad shutter at each side. </span>
      <span id="f1312">All these were always thrown open, of course. </span>
      <span id="f1313">I spent my days perched up there on the extreme fore-end of that roof, before the door. </span>
      <span id="f1314">At night I slept, or tried to, on the couch. </span>
      <span id="f1315">An athletic black belonging to some coast tribe, and educated by my poor predecessor, was the helmsman. </span>
      <span id="f1316">He sported a pair of brass earrings, wore a blue cloth wrapper from the waist to the ankles, and thought all the world of himself. </span>
      <span id="f1317">He was the most unstable kind of fool I had ever seen. </span>
      <span id="f1318">He steered with no end of a swagger while you were by; but if he lost sight of you, he became instantly the prey of an abject funk, and would let that cripple of a steamboat get the upper hand of him in a minute.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1319">&#34;I was looking down at the sounding-pole, and feeling much annoyed to see at each try a little more of it stick out of that river, when I saw my poleman give up the business suddenly, and stretch himself flat on the deck, without even taking the trouble to haul his pole in. </span>
      <span id="f1320">He kept hold on it though, and it trailed in the water. </span>
      <span id="f1321">At the same time the fireman, whom I could also see below me, sat down abruptly before his furnace and ducked his head. </span>
      <span id="f1322">I was amazed. </span>
      <span id="f1323">Then I had to look at the river mighty quick, because there was a snag in the fairway. </span>
      <span id="f1324">Sticks, little sticks, were flying about--thick: they were whizzing before my nose, dropping below me, striking behind me against my pilot-house. </span>
      <span id="f1325">All this time the river, the shore, the woods, were very quiet--perfectly quiet. </span>
      <span id="f1326">I could only hear the heavy splashing thump of the stern-wheel and the patter of these things. </span>
      <span id="f1327">We cleared the snag clumsily. </span>
      <span id="f1328">Arrows, by Jove! </span>
      <span id="f1329">We were being shot at! </span>
      <span id="f1330">I stepped in quickly to close the shutter on the land side. </span>
      <span id="f1331">That fool-helmsman, his hands on the spokes, was lifting his knees high, stamping his feet, champing his mouth, like a reined-in horse. </span>
      <span id="f1332">Confound him! </span>
      <span id="f1333">And we were staggering within ten feet of the bank. </span>
      <span id="f1334">I had to lean right out to swing the heavy shutter, and I saw a face amongst the leaves on the level with my own, looking at me very fierce and steady; and then suddenly, as though a veil had been removed from my eyes, I made out, deep in the tangled gloom, naked breasts, arms, legs, glaring eyes,--the bush was swarming with human limbs in movement, glistening, of bronze color. </span>
      <span id="f1335">The twigs shook, swayed, and rustled, the arrows flew out of them, and then the shutter came to. </span>
      <span id="f1336">&#39;Steer her straight,&#39; I said to the helmsman. </span>
      <span id="f1337">He held his head rigid, face forward; but his eyes rolled, he kept on lifting and setting down his feet gently, his mouth foamed a little. </span>
      <span id="f1338">&#39;Keep quiet!&#39; I said in a fury. </span>
      <span id="f1339">I might just as well have ordered a tree not to sway in the wind. </span>
      <span id="f1340">I darted out. </span>
      <span id="f1341">Below me there was a great scuffle of feet on the iron deck; confused exclamations; a voice screamed, &#39;Can you turn back?&#39; I caught shape of a V-shaped ripple on the water ahead. </span>
      <span id="f1342">What? </span>
      <span id="f1343">Another snag! </span>
      <span id="f1344">A fusillade burst out under my feet. </span>
      <span id="f1345">The pilgrims had opened with their Winchesters, and were simply squirting lead into that bush. </span>
      <span id="f1346">A deuce of a lot of smoke came up and drove slowly forward. </span>
      <span id="f1347">I swore at it. </span>
      <span id="f1348">Now I couldn&#39;t see the ripple or the snag either. </span>
      <span id="f1349">I stood in the doorway, peering, and the arrows came in swarms. </span>
      <span id="f1350">They might have been poisoned, but they looked as though they wouldn&#39;t kill a cat. </span>
      <span id="f1351">The bush began to howl. </span>
      <span id="f1352">Our wood-cutters raised a warlike whoop; the report of a rifle just at my back deafened me. </span>
      <span id="f1353">I glanced over my shoulder, and the pilot-house was yet full of noise and smoke when I made a dash at the wheel. </span>
      <span id="f1354">The fool-nigger had dropped everything, to throw the shutter open and let off that Martini-Henry. </span>
      <span id="f1355">He stood before the wide opening, glaring, and I yelled at him to come back, while I straightened the sudden twist out of that steamboat. </span>
      <span id="f1356">There was no room to turn even if I had wanted to, the snag was somewhere very near ahead in that confounded smoke, there was no time to lose, so I just crowded her into the bank--right into the bank, where I knew the water was deep.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1357">&#34;We tore slowly along the overhanging bushes in a whirl of broken twigs and flying leaves. </span>
      <span id="f1358">The fusillade below stopped short, as I had foreseen it would when the squirts got empty. </span>
      <span id="f1359">I threw my head back to a glinting whizz that traversed the pilot-house, in at one shutter-hole and out at the other. </span>
      <span id="f1360">Looking past that mad helmsman, who was shaking the empty rifle and yelling at the shore, I saw vague forms of men running bent double, leaping, gliding, distinct, incomplete, evanescent. </span>
      <span id="f1361">Something big appeared in the air before the shutter, the rifle went overboard, and the man stepped back swiftly, looked at me over his shoulder in an extraordinary, profound, familiar manner, and fell upon my feet. </span>
      <span id="f1362">The side of his head hit the wheel twice, and the end of what appeared a long cane clattered round and knocked over a little camp-stool. </span>
      <span id="f1363">It looked as though after wrenching that thing from somebody ashore he had lost his balance in the effort. </span>
      <span id="f1364">The thin smoke had blown away, we were clear of the snag, and looking ahead I could see that in another hundred yards or so I would be free to sheer off, away from the bank; but my feet felt so very warm and wet that I had to look down. </span>
      <span id="f1365">The man had rolled on his back and stared straight up at me; both his hands clutched that cane. </span>
      <span id="f1366">It was the shaft of a spear that, either thrown or lunged through the opening, had caught him in the side just below the ribs; the blade had gone in out of sight, after making a frightful gash; my shoes were full; a pool of blood lay very still, gleaming dark-red under the wheel; his eyes shone with an amazing luster. </span>
      <span id="f1367">The fusillade burst out again. </span>
      <span id="f1368">He looked at me anxiously, gripping the spear like something precious, with an air of being afraid I would try to take it away from him. </span>
      <span id="f1369">I had to make an effort to free my eyes from his gaze and attend to the steering. </span>
      <span id="f1370">With one hand I felt above my head for the line of the steam-whistle, and jerked out screech after screech hurriedly. </span>
      <span id="f1371">The tumult of angry and warlike yells was checked instantly, and then from the depths of the woods went out such a tremulous and prolonged wail of mournful fear and utter despair as may be imagined to follow the flight of the last hope from the earth. </span>
      <span id="f1372">There was a great commotion in the bush; the shower of arrows stopped, a few dropping shots rang out sharply--then silence, in which the languid beat of the stern-wheel came plainly to my ears. </span>
      <span id="f1373">I put the helm hard a-starboard at the moment when the pilgrim in pink pyjamas, very hot and agitated, appeared in the doorway. </span>
      <span id="f1374">&#39;The manager sends me--&#39; he began in an official tone, and stopped short. </span>
      <span id="f1375">&#39;Good God!&#39; he said, glaring at the wounded man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1376">&#34;We two whites stood over him, and his lustrous and inquiring glance enveloped us both. </span>
      <span id="f1377">I declare it looked as though he would presently put to us some question in an understandable language; but he died without uttering a sound, without moving a limb, without twitching a muscle. </span>
      <span id="f1378">Only in the very last moment, as though in response to some sign we could not see, to some whisper we could not hear, he frowned heavily, and that frown gave to his black death-mask an inconceivably somber, brooding, and menacing expression. </span>
      <span id="f1379">The luster of inquiring glance faded swiftly into vacant glassiness. </span>
      <span id="f1380">&#39;Can you steer?&#39; I asked the agent eagerly. </span>
      <span id="f1381">He looked very dubious; but I made a grab at his arm, and he understood at once I meant him to steer whether or no. </span>
      <span id="f1382">To tell you the truth, I was morbidly anxious to change my shoes and socks. </span>
      <span id="f1383">&#39;He is dead,&#39; murmured the fellow, immensely impressed. </span>
      <span id="f1384">&#39;No doubt about it,&#39; said I, tugging like mad at the shoe-laces. </span>
      <span id="f1385">&#39;And, by the way, I suppose Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1386">Kurtz is dead as well by this time.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1387">&#34;For the moment that was the dominant thought. </span>
      <span id="f1388">There was a sense of extreme disappointment, as though I had found out I had been striving after something altogether without a substance. </span>
      <span id="f1389">I couldn&#39;t have been more disgusted if I had traveled all this way for the sole purpose of talking with Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1390">Kurtz. </span>
      <span id="f1391">Talking with. </span>
      <span id="f1392">. </span>
      <span id="f1393">. </span>
      <span id="f1394">. </span>
      <span id="f1395">I flung one shoe overboard, and became aware that that was exactly what I had been looking forward to--a talk with Kurtz. </span>
      <span id="f1396">I made the strange discovery that I had never imagined him as doing, you know, but as discoursing. </span>
      <span id="f1397">I didn&#39;t say to myself, &#39;Now I will never see him,&#39; or &#39;Now I will never shake him by the hand,&#39; but, &#39;Now I will never hear him.&#39; The man presented himself as a voice. </span>
      <span id="f1398">Not of course that I did not connect him with some sort of action. </span>
      <span id="f1399">Hadn&#39;t I been told in all the tones of jealousy and admiration that he had collected, bartered, swindled, or stolen more ivory than all the other agents together? </span>
      <span id="f1400">That was not the point. </span>
      <span id="f1401">The point was in his being a gifted creature, and that of all his gifts the one that stood out pre-eminently, that carried with it a sense of real presence, was his ability to talk, his words--the gift of expression, the bewildering, the illuminating, the most exalted and the most contemptible, the pulsating stream of light, or the deceitful flow from the heart of an impenetrable darkness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1402">&#34;The other shoe went flying unto the devil-god of that river. </span>
      <span id="f1403">I thought, &#39;By Jove! </span>
      <span id="f1404">it&#39;s all over. </span>
      <span id="f1405">We are too late; he has vanished--the gift has vanished, by means of some spear, arrow, or club. </span>
      <span id="f1406">I will never hear that chap speak after all,&#39;--and my sorrow had a startling extravagance of emotion, even such as I had noticed in the howling sorrow of these savages in the bush. </span>
      <span id="f1407">I couldn&#39;t have felt more of lonely desolation somehow, had I been robbed of a belief or had missed my destiny in life. </span>
      <span id="f1408">. </span>
      <span id="f1409">. </span>
      <span id="f1410">. </span>
      <span id="f1411">Why do you sigh in this beastly way, somebody? </span>
      <span id="f1412">Absurd? </span>
      <span id="f1413">Well, absurd. </span>
      <span id="f1414">Good Lord! </span>
      <span id="f1415">mustn&#39;t a man ever--Here, give me some tobacco.&#34; . </span>
      <span id="f1416">. </span>
      <span id="f1417">.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1418">There was a pause of profound stillness, then a match flared, and Marlow&#39;s lean face appeared, worn, hollow, with downward folds and dropped eyelids, with an aspect of concentrated attention; and as he took vigorous draws at his pipe, it seemed to retreat and advance out of the night in the regular flicker of the tiny flame. </span>
      <span id="f1419">The match went out.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1420">&#34;Absurd!&#34; he cried. </span>
      <span id="f1421">&#34;This is the worst of trying to tell. </span>
      <span id="f1422">. </span>
      <span id="f1423">. </span>
      <span id="f1424">. </span>
      <span id="f1425">Here you all are, each moored with two good addresses, like a hulk with two anchors, a butcher round one corner, a policeman round another, excellent appetites, and temperature normal--you hear--normal from year&#39;s end to year&#39;s end. </span>
      <span id="f1426">And you say, Absurd! </span>
      <span id="f1427">Absurd be--exploded! </span>
      <span id="f1428">Absurd! </span>
      <span id="f1429">My dear boys, what can you expect from a man who out of sheer nervousness had just flung overboard a pair of new shoes. </span>
      <span id="f1430">Now I think of it, it is amazing I did not shed tears. </span>
      <span id="f1431">I am, upon the whole, proud of my fortitude. </span>
      <span id="f1432">I was cut to the quick at the idea of having lost the inestimable privilege of listening to the gifted Kurtz. </span>
      <span id="f1433">Of course I was wrong. </span>
      <span id="f1434">The privilege was waiting for me. </span>
      <span id="f1435">Oh yes, I heard more than enough. </span>
      <span id="f1436">And I was right, too. </span>
      <span id="f1437">A voice. </span>
      <span id="f1438">He was very little more than a voice. </span>
      <span id="f1439">And I heard--him--it--this voice--other voices--all of them were so little more than voices--and the memory of that time itself lingers around me, impalpable, like a dying vibration of one immense jabber, silly, atrocious, sordid, savage, or simply mean, without any kind of sense. </span>
      <span id="f1440">Voices, voices--even the girl herself--now--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1441">He was silent for a long time.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1442">&#34;I laid the ghost of his gifts at last with a lie,&#34; he began suddenly. </span>
      <span id="f1443">&#34;Girl! </span>
      <span id="f1444">What? </span>
      <span id="f1445">Did I mention a girl? </span>
      <span id="f1446">Oh, she is out of it--completely. </span>
      <span id="f1447">They--the women, I mean--are out of it--should be out of it. </span>
      <span id="f1448">We must help them to stay in that beautiful world of their own, lest ours gets worse. </span>
      <span id="f1449">Oh, she had to be out of it. </span>
      <span id="f1450">You should have heard the disinterred body of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1451">Kurtz saying, &#39;My Intended.&#39; You would have perceived directly then how completely she was out of it. </span>
      <span id="f1452">And the lofty frontal bone of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1453">Kurtz! </span>
      <span id="f1454">They say the hair goes on growing sometimes, but this--ah specimen, was impressively bald. </span>
      <span id="f1455">The wilderness had patted him on the head, and, behold, it was like a ball--an ivory ball; it had caressed him, and--lo!--he had withered; it had taken him, loved him, embraced him, got into his veins, consumed his flesh, and sealed his soul to its own by the inconceivable ceremonies of some devilish initiation. </span>
      <span id="f1456">He was its spoiled and pampered favorite. </span>
      <span id="f1457">Ivory? </span>
      <span id="f1458">I should think so. </span>
      <span id="f1459">Heaps of it, stacks of it. </span>
      <span id="f1460">The old mud shanty was bursting with it. </span>
      <span id="f1461">You would think there was not a single tusk left either above or below the ground in the whole country. </span>
      <span id="f1462">&#39;Mostly fossil,&#39; the manager had remarked disparagingly. </span>
      <span id="f1463">It was no more fossil than I am; but they call it fossil when it is dug up. </span>
      <span id="f1464">It appears these niggers do bury the tusks sometimes--but evidently they couldn&#39;t bury this parcel deep enough to save the gifted Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1465">Kurtz from his fate. </span>
      <span id="f1466">We filled the steamboat with it, and had to pile a lot on the deck. </span>
      <span id="f1467">Thus he could see and enjoy as long as he could see, because the appreciation of this favor had remained with him to the last. </span>
      <span id="f1468">You should have heard him say, &#39;My ivory.&#39; Oh yes, I heard him. </span>
      <span id="f1469">&#39;My Intended, my ivory, my station, my river, my--&#39; everything belonged to him. </span>
      <span id="f1470">It made me hold my breath in expectation of hearing the wilderness burst into a prodigious peal of laughter that would shake the fixed stars in their places. </span>
      <span id="f1471">Everything belonged to him--but that was a trifle. </span>
      <span id="f1472">The thing was to know what he belonged to, how many powers of darkness claimed him for their own. </span>
      <span id="f1473">That was the reflection that made you creepy all over. </span>
      <span id="f1474">It was impossible--it was not good for one either--trying to imagine. </span>
      <span id="f1475">He had taken a high seat amongst the devils of the land--I mean literally. </span>
      <span id="f1476">You can&#39;t understand. </span>
      <span id="f1477">How could you?--with solid pavement under your feet, surrounded by kind neighbors ready to cheer you or to fall on you, stepping delicately between the butcher and the policeman, in the holy terror of scandal and gallows and lunatic asylums--how can you imagine what particular region of the first ages a man&#39;s untrammeled feet may take him into by the way of solitude--utter solitude without a policeman--by the way of silence, utter silence, where no warning voice of a kind neighbor can be heard whispering of public opinion? </span>
      <span id="f1478">These little things make all the great difference. </span>
      <span id="f1479">When they are gone you must fall back upon your own innate strength, upon your own capacity for faithfulness. </span>
      <span id="f1480">Of course you may be too much of a fool to go wrong--too dull even to know you are being assaulted by the powers of darkness. </span>
      <span id="f1481">I take it, no fool ever made a bargain for his soul with the devil: the fool is too much of a fool, or the devil too much of a devil--I don&#39;t know which. </span>
      <span id="f1482">Or you may be such a thunderingly exalted creature as to be altogether deaf and blind to anything but heavenly sights and sounds. </span>
      <span id="f1483">Then the earth for you is only a standing place--and whether to be like this is your loss or your gain I won&#39;t pretend to say. </span>
      <span id="f1484">But most of us are neither one nor the other. </span>
      <span id="f1485">The earth for us is a place to live in, where we must put up with sights, with sounds, with smells too, by Jove!--breathe dead hippo, so to speak, and not be contaminated. </span>
      <span id="f1486">And there, don&#39;t you see? </span>
      <span id="f1487">Your strength comes in, the faith in your ability for the digging of unostentatious holes to bury the stuff in--your power of devotion, not to yourself, but to an obscure, back-breaking business. </span>
      <span id="f1488">And that&#39;s difficult enough. </span>
      <span id="f1489">Mind, I am not trying to excuse or even explain--I am trying to account to myself for--for--Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1490">Kurtz--for the shade of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1491">Kurtz. </span>
      <span id="f1492">This initiated wraith from the back of Nowhere honored me with its amazing confidence before it vanished altogether. </span>
      <span id="f1493">This was because it could speak English to me. </span>
      <span id="f1494">The original Kurtz had been educated partly in England, and--as he was good enough to say himself--his sympathies were in the right place. </span>
      <span id="f1495">His mother was half-English, his father was half-French. </span>
      <span id="f1496">All Europe contributed to the making of Kurtz; and by-and-by I learned that, most appropriately, the International Society for the Suppression of Savage Customs had intrusted him with the making of a report, for its future guidance. </span>
      <span id="f1497">And he had written it too. </span>
      <span id="f1498">I&#39;ve seen it. </span>
      <span id="f1499">I&#39;ve read it. </span>
      <span id="f1500">It was eloquent, vibrating with eloquence, but too high-strung, I think. </span>
      <span id="f1501">Seventeen pages of close writing he had found time for! </span>
      <span id="f1502">But this must have been before his--let us say--nerves, went wrong, and caused him to preside at certain midnight dances ending with unspeakable rites, which--as far as I reluctantly gathered from what I heard at various times--were offered up to him--do you understand?--to Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1503">Kurtz himself. </span>
      <span id="f1504">But it was a beautiful piece of writing. </span>
      <span id="f1505">The opening paragraph, however, in the light of later information, strikes me now as ominous. </span>
      <span id="f1506">He began with the argument that we whites, from the point of development we had arrived at, &#39;must necessarily appear to them [savages] in the nature of supernatural beings--we approach them with the might as of a deity,&#39; and so on, and so on. </span>
      <span id="f1507">&#39;By the simple exercise of our will we can exert a power for good practically unbounded,&#39; &amp;c., &amp;c. </span>
      <span id="f1508">From that point he soared and took me with him. </span>
      <span id="f1509">The peroration was magnificent, though difficult to remember, you know. </span>
      <span id="f1510">It gave me the notion of an exotic Immensity ruled by an august Benevolence. </span>
      <span id="f1511">It made me tingle with enthusiasm. </span>
      <span id="f1512">This was the unbounded power of eloquence--of words--of burning noble words. </span>
      <span id="f1513">There were no practical hints to interrupt the magic current of phrases, unless a kind of note at the foot of the last page, scrawled evidently much later, in an unsteady hand, may be regarded as the exposition of a method. </span>
      <span id="f1514">It was very simple, and at the end of that moving appeal to every altruistic sentiment it blazed at you, luminous and terrifying, like a flash of lightning in a serene sky: &#39;Exterminate all the brutes!&#39; The curious part was that he had apparently forgotten all about that valuable postscriptum, because, later on, when he in a sense came to himself, he repeatedly entreated me to take good care of &#39;my pamphlet&#39; (he called it), as it was sure to have in the future a good influence upon his career. </span>
      <span id="f1515">I had full information about all these things, and, besides, as it turned out, I was to have the care of his memory. </span>
      <span id="f1516">I&#39;ve done enough for it to give me the indisputable right to lay it, if I choose, for an everlasting rest in the dust-bin of progress, amongst all the sweepings and, figuratively speaking, all the dead cats of civilization. </span>
      <span id="f1517">But then, you see, I can&#39;t choose. </span>
      <span id="f1518">He won&#39;t be forgotten. </span>
      <span id="f1519">Whatever he was, he was not common. </span>
      <span id="f1520">He had the power to charm or frighten rudimentary souls into an aggravated witch-dance in his honor; he could also fill the small souls of the pilgrims with bitter misgivings: he had one devoted friend at least, and he had conquered one soul in the world that was neither rudimentary nor tainted with self-seeking. </span>
      <span id="f1521">No; I can&#39;t forget him, though I am not prepared to affirm the fellow was exactly worth the life we lost in getting to him. </span>
      <span id="f1522">I missed my late helmsman awfully,--I missed him even while his body was still lying in the pilot-house. </span>
      <span id="f1523">Perhaps you will think it passing strange this regret for a savage who was no more account than a grain of sand in a black Sahara. </span>
      <span id="f1524">Well, don&#39;t you see, he had done something, he had steered; for months I had him at my back--a help--an instrument. </span>
      <span id="f1525">It was a kind of partnership. </span>
      <span id="f1526">He steered for me--I had to look after him, I worried about his deficiencies, and thus a subtle bond had been created, of which I only became aware when it was suddenly broken. </span>
      <span id="f1527">And the intimate profundity of that look he gave me when he received his hurt remains to this day in my memory--like a claim of distant kinship affirmed in a supreme moment.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1528">&#34;Poor fool! </span>
      <span id="f1529">If he had only left that shutter alone. </span>
      <span id="f1530">He had no restraint, no restraint--just like Kurtz--a tree swayed by the wind. </span>
      <span id="f1531">As soon as I had put on a dry pair of slippers, I dragged him out, after first jerking the spear out of his side, which operation I confess I performed with my eyes shut tight. </span>
      <span id="f1532">His heels leaped together over the little door-step; his shoulders were pressed to my breast; I hugged him from behind desperately. </span>
      <span id="f1533">Oh! </span>
      <span id="f1534">he was heavy, heavy; heavier than any man on earth, I should imagine. </span>
      <span id="f1535">Then without more ado I tipped him overboard. </span>
      <span id="f1536">The current snatched him as though he had been a wisp of grass, and I saw the body roll over twice before I lost sight of it for ever. </span>
      <span id="f1537">All the pilgrims and the manager were then congregated on the awning-deck about the pilot-house, chattering at each other like a flock of excited magpies, and there was a scandalized murmur at my heartless promptitude. </span>
      <span id="f1538">What they wanted to keep that body hanging about for I can&#39;t guess. </span>
      <span id="f1539">Embalm it, maybe. </span>
      <span id="f1540">But I had also heard another, and a very ominous, murmur on the deck below. </span>
      <span id="f1541">My friends the wood-cutters were likewise scandalized, and with a better show of reason--though I admit that the reason itself was quite inadmissible. </span>
      <span id="f1542">Oh, quite! </span>
      <span id="f1543">I had made up my mind that if my late helmsman was to be eaten, the fishes alone should have him. </span>
      <span id="f1544">He had been a very second-rate helmsman while alive, but now he was dead he might have become a first-class temptation, and possibly cause some startling trouble. </span>
      <span id="f1545">Besides, I was anxious to take the wheel, the man in pink pyjamas showing himself a hopeless duffer at the business.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1546">&#34;This I did directly the simple funeral was over. </span>
      <span id="f1547">We were going half-speed, keeping right in the middle of the stream, and I listened to the talk about me. </span>
      <span id="f1548">They had given up Kurtz, they had given up the station; Kurtz was dead, and the station had been burnt--and so on--and so on. </span>
      <span id="f1549">The red-haired pilgrim was beside himself with the thought that at least this poor Kurtz had been properly revenged. </span>
      <span id="f1550">&#39;Say! </span>
      <span id="f1551">We must have made a glorious slaughter of them in the bush. </span>
      <span id="f1552">Eh? </span>
      <span id="f1553">What do you think? </span>
      <span id="f1554">Say?&#39; He positively danced, the bloodthirsty little gingery beggar. </span>
      <span id="f1555">And he had nearly fainted when he saw the wounded man! </span>
      <span id="f1556">I could not help saying, &#39;You made a glorious lot of smoke, anyhow.&#39; I had seen, from the way the tops of the bushes rustled and flew, that almost all the shots had gone too high. </span>
      <span id="f1557">You can&#39;t hit anything unless you take aim and fire from the shoulder; but these chaps fired from the hip with their eyes shut. </span>
      <span id="f1558">The retreat, I maintained--and I was right--was caused by the screeching of the steam-whistle. </span>
      <span id="f1559">Upon this they forgot Kurtz, and began to howl at me with indignant protests.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1560">&#34;The manager stood by the wheel murmuring confidentially about the necessity of getting well away down the river before dark at all events, when I saw in the distance a clearing on the river-side and the outlines of some sort of building. </span>
      <span id="f1561">&#39;What&#39;s this?&#39; I asked. </span>
      <span id="f1562">He clapped his hands in wonder. </span>
      <span id="f1563">&#39;The station!&#39; he cried. </span>
      <span id="f1564">I edged in at once, still going half-speed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1565">&#34;Through my glasses I saw the slope of a hill interspersed with rare trees and perfectly free from undergrowth. </span>
      <span id="f1566">A long decaying building on the summit was half buried in the high grass; the large holes in the peaked roof gaped black from afar; the jungle and the woods made a background. </span>
      <span id="f1567">There was no inclosure or fence of any kind; but there had been one apparently, for near the house half-a-dozen slim posts remained in a row, roughly trimmed, and with their upper ends ornamented with round carved balls. </span>
      <span id="f1568">The rails, or whatever there had been between, had disappeared. </span>
      <span id="f1569">Of course the forest surrounded all that. </span>
      <span id="f1570">The river-bank was clear, and on the water-side I saw a white man under a hat like a cart-wheel beckoning persistently with his whole arm. </span>
      <span id="f1571">Examining the edge of the forest above and below, I was almost certain I could see movements--human forms gliding here and there. </span>
      <span id="f1572">I steamed past prudently, then stopped the engines and let her drift down. </span>
      <span id="f1573">The man on the shore began to shout, urging us to land. </span>
      <span id="f1574">&#39;We have been attacked,&#39; screamed the manager. </span>
      <span id="f1575">&#39;I know--I know. </span>
      <span id="f1576">It&#39;s all right,&#39; yelled back the other, as cheerful as you please. </span>
      <span id="f1577">&#39;Come along. </span>
      <span id="f1578">It&#39;s all right. </span>
      <span id="f1579">I am glad.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1580">&#34;His aspect reminded me of something I had seen--something funny I had seen somewhere. </span>
      <span id="f1581">As I maneuvered to get alongside, I was asking myself, &#39;What does this fellow look like?&#39; Suddenly I got it. </span>
      <span id="f1582">He looked like a harlequin. </span>
      <span id="f1583">His clothes had been made of some stuff that was brown holland probably, but it was covered with patches all over, with bright patches, blue, red, and yellow,--patches on the back, patches on front, patches on elbows, on knees; colored binding round his jacket, scarlet edging at the bottom of his trousers; and the sunshine made him look extremely gay and wonderfully neat withal, because you could see how beautifully all this patching had been done. </span>
      <span id="f1584">A beardless, boyish face, very fair, no features to speak of, nose peeling, little blue eyes, smiles and frowns chasing each other over that open countenance like sunshine and shadow on a windswept plain. </span>
      <span id="f1585">&#39;Look out, captain!&#39; he cried; &#39;there&#39;s a snag lodged in here last night.&#39; What! </span>
      <span id="f1586">Another snag? </span>
      <span id="f1587">I confess I swore shamefully. </span>
      <span id="f1588">I had nearly holed my cripple, to finish off that charming trip. </span>
      <span id="f1589">The harlequin on the bank turned his little pug nose up to me. </span>
      <span id="f1590">&#39;You English?&#39; he asked, all smiles. </span>
      <span id="f1591">&#39;Are you?&#39; I shouted from the wheel. </span>
      <span id="f1592">The smiles vanished, and he shook his head as if sorry for my disappointment. </span>
      <span id="f1593">Then he brightened up. </span>
      <span id="f1594">&#39;Never mind!&#39; he cried encouragingly. </span>
      <span id="f1595">&#39;Are we in time?&#39; I asked. </span>
      <span id="f1596">&#39;He is up there,&#39; he replied, with a toss of the head up the hill, and becoming gloomy all of a sudden. </span>
      <span id="f1597">His face was like the autumn sky, overcast one moment and bright the next.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1598">&#34;When the manager, escorted by the pilgrims, all of them armed to the teeth, had gone to the house, this chap came on board. </span>
      <span id="f1599">&#39;I say, I don&#39;t like this. </span>
      <span id="f1600">These natives are in the bush,&#39; I said. </span>
      <span id="f1601">He assured me earnestly it was all right. </span>
      <span id="f1602">&#39;They are simple people,&#39; he added; &#39;well, I am glad you came. </span>
      <span id="f1603">It took me all my time to keep them off.&#39; &#39;But you said it was all right,&#39; I cried. </span>
      <span id="f1604">&#39;Oh, they meant no harm,&#39; he said; and as I stared he corrected himself, &#39;Not exactly.&#39; Then vivaciously, &#39;My faith, your pilot-house wants a clean up!&#39; In the next breath he advised me to keep enough steam on the boiler to blow the whistle in case of any trouble. </span>
      <span id="f1605">&#39;One good screech will do more for you than all your rifles. </span>
      <span id="f1606">They are simple people,&#39; he repeated. </span>
      <span id="f1607">He rattled away at such a rate he quite overwhelmed me. </span>
      <span id="f1608">He seemed to be trying to make up for lots of silence, and actually hinted, laughing, that such was the case. </span>
      <span id="f1609">&#39;Don&#39;t you talk with Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1610">Kurtz?&#39; I said. </span>
      <span id="f1611">&#39;You don&#39;t talk with that man--you listen to him,&#39; he exclaimed with severe exaltation. </span>
      <span id="f1612">&#39;But now--&#39; He waved his arm, and in the twinkling of an eye was in the uttermost depths of despondency. </span>
      <span id="f1613">In a moment he came up again with a jump, possessed himself of both my hands, shook them continuously, while he gabbled: &#39;Brother sailor . </span>
      <span id="f1614">. </span>
      <span id="f1615">. </span>
      <span id="f1616">honor . </span>
      <span id="f1617">. </span>
      <span id="f1618">. </span>
      <span id="f1619">pleasure . </span>
      <span id="f1620">. </span>
      <span id="f1621">. </span>
      <span id="f1622">delight . </span>
      <span id="f1623">. </span>
      <span id="f1624">. </span>
      <span id="f1625">introduce myself . </span>
      <span id="f1626">. </span>
      <span id="f1627">. </span>
      <span id="f1628">Russian . </span>
      <span id="f1629">. </span>
      <span id="f1630">. </span>
      <span id="f1631">son of an arch-priest . </span>
      <span id="f1632">. </span>
      <span id="f1633">. </span>
      <span id="f1634">Government of Tambov . </span>
      <span id="f1635">. </span>
      <span id="f1636">. </span>
      <span id="f1637">What? </span>
      <span id="f1638">Tobacco! </span>
      <span id="f1639">English tobacco; the excellent English tobacco! </span>
      <span id="f1640">Now, that&#39;s brotherly. </span>
      <span id="f1641">Smoke? </span>
      <span id="f1642">Where&#39;s a sailor that does not smoke?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1643">&#34;The pipe soothed him, and gradually I made out he had run away from school, had gone to sea in a Russian ship; ran away again; served some time in English ships; was now reconciled with the arch-priest. </span>
      <span id="f1644">He made a point of that. </span>
      <span id="f1645">&#39;But when one is young one must see things, gather experience, ideas; enlarge the mind.&#39; &#39;Here!&#39; I interrupted. </span>
      <span id="f1646">&#39;You can never tell! </span>
      <span id="f1647">Here I have met Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1648">Kurtz,&#39; he said, youthfully solemn and reproachful. </span>
      <span id="f1649">I held my tongue after that. </span>
      <span id="f1650">It appears he had persuaded a Dutch trading-house on the coast to fit him out with stores and goods, and had started for the interior with a light heart, and no more idea of what would happen to him than a baby. </span>
      <span id="f1651">He had been wandering about that river for nearly two years alone, cut off from everybody and everything. </span>
      <span id="f1652">&#39;I am not so young as I look. </span>
      <span id="f1653">I am twenty-five,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f1654">&#39;At first old Van Shuyten would tell me to go to the devil,&#39; he narrated with keen enjoyment; &#39;but I stuck to him, and talked and talked, till at last he got afraid I would talk the hind-leg off his favorite dog, so he gave me some cheap things and a few guns, and told me he hoped he would never see my face again. </span>
      <span id="f1655">Good old Dutchman, Van Shuyten. </span>
      <span id="f1656">I&#39;ve sent him one small lot of ivory a year ago, so that he can&#39;t call me a little thief when I get back. </span>
      <span id="f1657">I hope he got it. </span>
      <span id="f1658">And for the rest I don&#39;t care. </span>
      <span id="f1659">I had some wood stacked for you. </span>
      <span id="f1660">That was my old house. </span>
      <span id="f1661">Did you see?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1662">&#34;I gave him Towson&#39;s book. </span>
      <span id="f1663">He made as though he would kiss me, but restrained himself. </span>
      <span id="f1664">&#39;The only book I had left, and I thought I had lost it,&#39; he said, looking at it ecstatically. </span>
      <span id="f1665">&#39;So many accidents happen to a man going about alone, you know. </span>
      <span id="f1666">Canoes get upset sometimes--and sometimes you&#39;ve got to clear out so quick when the people get angry.&#39; He thumbed the pages. </span>
      <span id="f1667">&#39;You made notes in Russian?&#39; I asked. </span>
      <span id="f1668">He nodded. </span>
      <span id="f1669">&#39;I thought they were written in cipher,&#39; I said. </span>
      <span id="f1670">He laughed, then became serious. </span>
      <span id="f1671">&#39;I had lots of trouble to keep these people off,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f1672">&#39;Did they want to kill you?&#39; I asked. </span>
      <span id="f1673">&#39;Oh no!&#39; he cried, and checked himself. </span>
      <span id="f1674">&#39;Why did they attack us?&#39; I pursued. </span>
      <span id="f1675">He hesitated, then said shamefacedly, &#39;They don&#39;t want him to go.&#39; &#39;Don&#39;t they?&#39; I said, curiously. </span>
      <span id="f1676">He nodded a nod full of mystery and wisdom. </span>
      <span id="f1677">&#39;I tell you,&#39; he cried, &#39;this man has enlarged my mind.&#39; He opened his arms wide, staring at me with his little blue eyes that were perfectly round.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>