<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Chapter III. Part 1</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1678">Chapter III. Part 1</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1680">&#34;I looked at him, lost in astonishment. </span>
      <span id="f1681">There he was before me, in motley, as though he had absconded from a troupe of mimes, enthusiastic, fabulous. </span>
      <span id="f1682">His very existence was improbable, inexplicable, and altogether bewildering. </span>
      <span id="f1683">He was an insoluble problem. </span>
      <span id="f1684">It was inconceivable how he had existed, how he had succeeded in getting so far, how he had managed to remain--why he did not instantly disappear. </span>
      <span id="f1685">&#39;I went a little farther,&#39; he said, &#39;then still a little farther--till I had gone so far that I don&#39;t know how I&#39;ll ever get back. </span>
      <span id="f1686">Never mind. </span>
      <span id="f1687">Plenty time. </span>
      <span id="f1688">I can manage. </span>
      <span id="f1689">You take Kurtz away quick--quick--I tell you.&#39; The glamour of youth enveloped his particolored rags, his destitution, his loneliness, the essential desolation of his futile wanderings. </span>
      <span id="f1690">For months--for years--his life hadn&#39;t been worth a day&#39;s purchase; and there he was gallantly, thoughtlessly alive, to all appearance indestructible solely by the virtue of his few years and of his unreflecting audacity. </span>
      <span id="f1691">I was seduced into something like admiration--like envy. </span>
      <span id="f1692">Glamour urged him on, glamour kept him unscathed. </span>
      <span id="f1693">He surely wanted nothing from the wilderness but space to breathe in and to push on through. </span>
      <span id="f1694">His need was to exist, and to move onwards at the greatest possible risk, and with a maximum of privation. </span>
      <span id="f1695">If the absolutely pure, uncalculating, unpractical spirit of adventure had ever ruled a human being, it ruled this be-patched youth. </span>
      <span id="f1696">I almost envied him the possession of this modest and clear flame. </span>
      <span id="f1697">It seemed to have consumed all thought of self so completely, that, even while he was talking to you, you forgot that it was he--the man before your eyes--who had gone through these things. </span>
      <span id="f1698">I did not envy him his devotion to Kurtz, though. </span>
      <span id="f1699">He had not meditated over it. </span>
      <span id="f1700">It came to him, and he accepted it with a sort of eager fatalism. </span>
      <span id="f1701">I must say that to me it appeared about the most dangerous thing in every way he had come upon so far.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1702">&#34;They had come together unavoidably, like two ships becalmed near each other, and lay rubbing sides at last. </span>
      <span id="f1703">I suppose Kurtz wanted an audience, because on a certain occasion, when encamped in the forest, they had talked all night, or more probably Kurtz had talked. </span>
      <span id="f1704">&#39;We talked of everything,&#39; he said, quite transported at the recollection. </span>
      <span id="f1705">&#39;I forgot there was such a thing as sleep. </span>
      <span id="f1706">The night did not seem to last an hour. </span>
      <span id="f1707">Everything! </span>
      <span id="f1708">Everything! </span>
      <span id="f1709">. </span>
      <span id="f1710">. </span>
      <span id="f1711">. </span>
      <span id="f1712">Of love too.&#39; &#39;Ah, he talked to you of love!&#39; I said, much amused. </span>
      <span id="f1713">&#39;It isn&#39;t what you think,&#39; he cried, almost passionately. </span>
      <span id="f1714">&#39;It was in general. </span>
      <span id="f1715">He made me see things--things.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1716">&#34;He threw his arms up. </span>
      <span id="f1717">We were on deck at the time, and the headman of my wood-cutters, lounging near by, turned upon him his heavy and glittering eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1718">I looked around, and I don&#39;t know why, but I assure you that never, never before, did this land, this river, this jungle, the very arch of this blazing sky, appear to me so hopeless and so dark, so impenetrable to human thought, so pitiless to human weakness. </span>
      <span id="f1719">&#39;And, ever since, you have been with him, of course?&#39; I said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1720">&#34;On the contrary. </span>
      <span id="f1721">It appears their intercourse had been very much broken by various causes. </span>
      <span id="f1722">He had, as he informed me proudly, managed to nurse Kurtz through two illnesses (he alluded to it as you would to some risky feat), but as a rule Kurtz wandered alone, far in the depths of the forest. </span>
      <span id="f1723">&#39;Very often coming to this station, I had to wait days and days before he would turn up,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f1724">&#39;Ah, it was worth waiting for!--sometimes.&#39; &#39;What was he doing? </span>
      <span id="f1725">exploring or what?&#39; I asked. </span>
      <span id="f1726">&#39;Oh yes, of course;&#39; he had discovered lots of villages, a lake too--he did not know exactly in what direction; it was dangerous to inquire too much--but mostly his expeditions had been for ivory. </span>
      <span id="f1727">&#39;But he had no goods to trade with by that time,&#39; I objected. </span>
      <span id="f1728">&#39;There&#39;s a good lot of cartridges left even yet,&#39; he answered, looking away. </span>
      <span id="f1729">&#39;To speak plainly, he raided the country,&#39; I said. </span>
      <span id="f1730">He nodded. </span>
      <span id="f1731">&#39;Not alone, surely!&#39; He muttered something about the villages round that lake. </span>
      <span id="f1732">&#39;Kurtz got the tribe to follow him, did he?&#39; I suggested. </span>
      <span id="f1733">He fidgeted a little. </span>
      <span id="f1734">&#39;They adored him,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f1735">The tone of these words was so extraordinary that I looked at him searchingly. </span>
      <span id="f1736">It was curious to see his mingled eagerness and reluctance to speak of Kurtz. </span>
      <span id="f1737">The man filled his life, occupied his thoughts, swayed his emotions. </span>
      <span id="f1738">&#39;What can you expect?&#39; he burst out; &#39;he came to them with thunder and lightning, you know--and they had never seen anything like it--and very terrible. </span>
      <span id="f1739">He could be very terrible. </span>
      <span id="f1740">You can&#39;t judge Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1741">Kurtz as you would an ordinary man. </span>
      <span id="f1742">No, no, no! </span>
      <span id="f1743">Now--just to give you an idea--I don&#39;t mind telling you, he wanted to shoot me too one day--but I don&#39;t judge him.&#39; &#39;Shoot you!&#39; I cried. </span>
      <span id="f1744">&#39;What for?&#39; &#39;Well, I had a small lot of ivory the chief of that village near my house gave me. </span>
      <span id="f1745">You see I used to shoot game for them. </span>
      <span id="f1746">Well, he wanted it, and wouldn&#39;t hear reason. </span>
      <span id="f1747">He declared he would shoot me unless I gave him the ivory and then cleared out of the country, because he could do so, and had a fancy for it, and there was nothing on earth to prevent him killing whom he jolly well pleased. </span>
      <span id="f1748">And it was true too. </span>
      <span id="f1749">I gave him the ivory. </span>
      <span id="f1750">What did I care! </span>
      <span id="f1751">But I didn&#39;t clear out. </span>
      <span id="f1752">No, no. </span>
      <span id="f1753">I couldn&#39;t leave him. </span>
      <span id="f1754">I had to be careful, of course, till we got friendly again for a time. </span>
      <span id="f1755">He had his second illness then. </span>
      <span id="f1756">Afterwards I had to keep out of the way; but I didn&#39;t mind. </span>
      <span id="f1757">He was living for the most part in those villages on the lake. </span>
      <span id="f1758">When he came down to the river, sometimes he would take to me, and sometimes it was better for me to be careful. </span>
      <span id="f1759">This man suffered too much. </span>
      <span id="f1760">He hated all this, and somehow he couldn&#39;t get away. </span>
      <span id="f1761">When I had a chance I begged him to try and leave while there was time; I offered to go back with him. </span>
      <span id="f1762">And he would say yes, and then he would remain; go off on another ivory hunt; disappear for weeks; forget himself amongst these people--forget himself--you know.&#39; &#39;Why! </span>
      <span id="f1763">he&#39;s mad,&#39; I said. </span>
      <span id="f1764">He protested indignantly. </span>
      <span id="f1765">Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1766">Kurtz couldn&#39;t be mad. </span>
      <span id="f1767">If I had heard him talk, only two days ago, I wouldn&#39;t dare hint at such a thing. </span>
      <span id="f1768">. </span>
      <span id="f1769">. </span>
      <span id="f1770">. </span>
      <span id="f1771">I had taken up my binoculars while we talked and was looking at the shore, sweeping the limit of the forest at each side and at the back of the house. </span>
      <span id="f1772">The consciousness of there being people in that bush, so silent, so quiet--as silent and quiet as the ruined house on the hill--made me uneasy. </span>
      <span id="f1773">There was no sign on the face of nature of this amazing tale that was not so much told as suggested to me in desolate exclamations, completed by shrugs, in interrupted phrases, in hints ending in deep sighs. </span>
      <span id="f1774">The woods were unmoved, like a mask--heavy, like the closed door of a prison--they looked with their air of hidden knowledge, of patient expectation, of unapproachable silence. </span>
      <span id="f1775">The Russian was explaining to me that it was only lately that Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1776">Kurtz had come down to the river, bringing along with him all the fighting men of that lake tribe. </span>
      <span id="f1777">He had been absent for several months--getting himself adored, I suppose--and had come down unexpectedly, with the intention to all appearance of making a raid either across the river or down stream. </span>
      <span id="f1778">Evidently the appetite for more ivory had got the better of the--what shall I say?--less material aspirations. </span>
      <span id="f1779">However he had got much worse suddenly. </span>
      <span id="f1780">&#39;I heard he was lying helpless, and so I came up--took my chance,&#39; said the Russian. </span>
      <span id="f1781">&#39;Oh, he is bad, very bad.&#39; I directed my glass to the house. </span>
      <span id="f1782">There were no signs of life, but there was the ruined roof, the long mud wall peeping above the grass, with three little square window-holes, no two of the same size; all this brought within reach of my hand, as it were. </span>
      <span id="f1783">And then I made a brusque movement, and one of the remaining posts of that vanished fence leaped up in the field of my glass. </span>
      <span id="f1784">You remember I told you I had been struck at the distance by certain attempts at ornamentation, rather remarkable in the ruinous aspect of the place. </span>
      <span id="f1785">Now I had suddenly a nearer view, and its first result was to make me throw my head back as if before a blow. </span>
      <span id="f1786">Then I went carefully from post to post with my glass, and I saw my mistake. </span>
      <span id="f1787">These round knobs were not ornamental but symbolic; they were expressive and puzzling, striking and disturbing--food for thought and also for the vultures if there had been any looking down from the sky; but at all events for such ants as were industrious enough to ascend the pole. </span>
      <span id="f1788">They would have been even more impressive, those heads on the stakes, if their faces had not been turned to the house. </span>
      <span id="f1789">Only one, the first I had made out, was facing my way. </span>
      <span id="f1790">I was not so shocked as you may think. </span>
      <span id="f1791">The start back I had given was really nothing but a movement of surprise. </span>
      <span id="f1792">I had expected to see a knob of wood there, you know. </span>
      <span id="f1793">I returned deliberately to the first I had seen--and there it was, black, dried, sunken, with closed eyelids,--a head that seemed to sleep at the top of that pole, and, with the shrunken dry lips showing a narrow white line of the teeth, was smiling too, smiling continuously at some endless and jocose dream of that eternal slumber.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1794">&#34;I am not disclosing any trade secrets. </span>
      <span id="f1795">In fact the manager said afterwards that Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1796">Kurtz&#39;s methods had ruined the district. </span>
      <span id="f1797">I have no opinion on that point, but I want you clearly to understand that there was nothing exactly profitable in these heads being there. </span>
      <span id="f1798">They only showed that Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1799">Kurtz lacked restraint in the gratification of his various lusts, that there was something wanting in him--some small matter which, when the pressing need arose, could not be found under his magnificent eloquence. </span>
      <span id="f1800">Whether he knew of this deficiency himself I can&#39;t say. </span>
      <span id="f1801">I think the knowledge came to him at last--only at the very last. </span>
      <span id="f1802">But the wilderness had found him out early, and had taken on him a terrible vengeance for the fantastic invasion. </span>
      <span id="f1803">I think it had whispered to him things about himself which he did not know, things of which he had no conception till he took counsel with this great solitude--and the whisper had proved irresistibly fascinating. </span>
      <span id="f1804">It echoed loudly within him because he was hollow at the core. </span>
      <span id="f1805">. </span>
      <span id="f1806">. </span>
      <span id="f1807">. </span>
      <span id="f1808">I put down the glass, and the head that had appeared near enough to be spoken to seemed at once to have leaped away from me into inaccessible distance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1809">&#34;The admirer of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1810">Kurtz was a bit crestfallen. </span>
      <span id="f1811">In a hurried, indistinct voice he began to assure me he had not dared to take these--say, symbols--down. </span>
      <span id="f1812">He was not afraid of the natives; they would not stir till Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1813">Kurtz gave the word. </span>
      <span id="f1814">His ascendency was extraordinary. </span>
      <span id="f1815">The camps of these people surrounded the place, and the chiefs came every day to see him. </span>
      <span id="f1816">They would crawl. </span>
      <span id="f1817">. </span>
      <span id="f1818">. </span>
      <span id="f1819">. </span>
      <span id="f1820">&#39;I don&#39;t want to know anything of the ceremonies used when approaching Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1821">Kurtz,&#39; I shouted. </span>
      <span id="f1822">Curious, this feeling that came over me that such details would be more intolerable than those heads drying on the stakes under Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1823">Kurtz&#39;s windows. </span>
      <span id="f1824">After all, that was only a savage sight, while I seemed at one bound to have been transported into some lightless region of subtle horrors, where pure, uncomplicated savagery was a positive relief, being something that had a right to exist--obviously--in the sunshine. </span>
      <span id="f1825">The young man looked at me with surprise. </span>
      <span id="f1826">I suppose it did not occur to him Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1827">Kurtz was no idol of mine. </span>
      <span id="f1828">He forgot I hadn&#39;t heard any of these splendid monologues on, what was it? </span>
      <span id="f1829">on love, justice, conduct of life--or what not. </span>
      <span id="f1830">If it had come to crawling before Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1831">Kurtz, he crawled as much as the veriest savage of them all. </span>
      <span id="f1832">I had no idea of the conditions, he said: these heads were the heads of rebels. </span>
      <span id="f1833">I shocked him excessively by laughing. </span>
      <span id="f1834">Rebels! </span>
      <span id="f1835">What would be the next definition I was to hear? </span>
      <span id="f1836">There had been enemies, criminals, workers--and these were rebels. </span>
      <span id="f1837">Those rebellious heads looked very subdued to me on their sticks. </span>
      <span id="f1838">&#39;You don&#39;t know how such a life tries a man like Kurtz,&#39; cried Kurtz&#39;s last disciple. </span>
      <span id="f1839">&#39;Well, and you?&#39; I said. </span>
      <span id="f1840">&#39;I! </span>
      <span id="f1841">I! </span>
      <span id="f1842">I am a simple man. </span>
      <span id="f1843">I have no great thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f1844">I want nothing from anybody. </span>
      <span id="f1845">How can you compare me to . </span>
      <span id="f1846">. </span>
      <span id="f1847">.?&#39; His feelings were too much for speech, and suddenly he broke down. </span>
      <span id="f1848">&#39;I don&#39;t understand,&#39; he groaned. </span>
      <span id="f1849">&#39;I&#39;ve been doing my best to keep him alive, and that&#39;s enough. </span>
      <span id="f1850">I had no hand in all this. </span>
      <span id="f1851">I have no abilities. </span>
      <span id="f1852">There hasn&#39;t been a drop of medicine or a mouthful of invalid food for months here. </span>
      <span id="f1853">He was shamefully abandoned. </span>
      <span id="f1854">A man like this, with such ideas. </span>
      <span id="f1855">Shamefully! </span>
      <span id="f1856">Shamefully! </span>
      <span id="f1857">I--I--haven&#39;t slept for the last ten nights. </span>
      <span id="f1858">. </span>
      <span id="f1859">. </span>
      <span id="f1860">.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1861">&#34;His voice lost itself in the calm of the evening. </span>
      <span id="f1862">The long shadows of the forest had slipped down hill while we talked, had gone far beyond the ruined hovel, beyond the symbolic row of stakes. </span>
      <span id="f1863">All this was in the gloom, while we down there were yet in the sunshine, and the stretch of the river abreast of the clearing glittered in a still and dazzling splendor, with a murky and over-shadowed bend above and below. </span>
      <span id="f1864">Not a living soul was seen on the shore. </span>
      <span id="f1865">The bushes did not rustle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1866">&#34;Suddenly round the corner of the house a group of men appeared, as though they had come up from the ground. </span>
      <span id="f1867">They waded waist-deep in the grass, in a compact body, bearing an improvised stretcher in their midst. </span>
      <span id="f1868">Instantly, in the emptiness of the landscape, a cry arose whose shrillness pierced the still air like a sharp arrow flying straight to the very heart of the land; and, as if by enchantment, streams of human beings--of naked human beings--with spears in their hands, with bows, with shields, with wild glances and savage movements, were poured into the clearing by the dark-faced and pensive forest. </span>
      <span id="f1869">The bushes shook, the grass swayed for a time, and then everything stood still in attentive immobility.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1870">&#34;&#39;Now, if he does not say the right thing to them we are all done for,&#39; said the Russian at my elbow. </span>
      <span id="f1871">The knot of men with the stretcher had stopped too, half-way to the steamer, as if petrified. </span>
      <span id="f1872">I saw the man on the stretcher sit up, lank and with an uplifted arm, above the shoulders of the bearers. </span>
      <span id="f1873">&#39;Let us hope that the man who can talk so well of love in general will find some particular reason to spare us this time,&#39; I said. </span>
      <span id="f1874">I resented bitterly the absurd danger of our situation, as if to be at the mercy of that atrocious phantom had been a dishonoring necessity. </span>
      <span id="f1875">I could not hear a sound, but through my glasses I saw the thin arm extended commandingly, the lower jaw moving, the eyes of that apparition shining darkly far in its bony head that nodded with grotesque jerks. </span>
      <span id="f1876">Kurtz--Kurtz--that means short in German--don&#39;t it? </span>
      <span id="f1877">Well, the name was as true as everything else in his life--and death. </span>
      <span id="f1878">He looked at least seven feet long. </span>
      <span id="f1879">His covering had fallen off, and his body emerged from it pitiful and appalling as from a winding-sheet. </span>
      <span id="f1880">I could see the cage of his ribs all astir, the bones of his arm waving. </span>
      <span id="f1881">It was as though an animated image of death carved out of old ivory had been shaking its hand with menaces at a motionless crowd of men made of dark and glittering bronze. </span>
      <span id="f1882">I saw him open his mouth wide--it gave him a weirdly voracious aspect, as though he had wanted to swallow all the air, all the earth, all the men before him. </span>
      <span id="f1883">A deep voice reached me faintly. </span>
      <span id="f1884">He must have been shouting. </span>
      <span id="f1885">He fell back suddenly. </span>
      <span id="f1886">The stretcher shook as the bearers staggered forward again, and almost at the same time I noticed that the crowd of savages was vanishing without any perceptible movement of retreat, as if the forest that had ejected these beings so suddenly had drawn them in again as the breath is drawn in a long aspiration.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1887">&#34;Some of the pilgrims behind the stretcher carried his arms--two shot-guns, a heavy rifle, and a light revolver-carbine--the thunderbolts of that pitiful Jupiter. </span>
      <span id="f1888">The manager bent over him murmuring as he walked beside his head. </span>
      <span id="f1889">They laid him down in one of the little cabins--just a room for a bed-place and a camp-stool or two, you know. </span>
      <span id="f1890">We had brought his belated correspondence, and a lot of torn envelopes and open letters littered his bed. </span>
      <span id="f1891">His hand roamed feebly amongst these papers. </span>
      <span id="f1892">I was struck by the fire of his eyes and the composed languor of his expression. </span>
      <span id="f1893">It was not so much the exhaustion of disease. </span>
      <span id="f1894">He did not seem in pain. </span>
      <span id="f1895">This shadow looked satiated and calm, as though for the moment it had had its fill of all the emotions.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1896">&#34;He rustled one of the letters, and looking straight in my face said, &#39;I am glad.&#39; Somebody had been writing to him about me. </span>
      <span id="f1897">These special recommendations were turning up again. </span>
      <span id="f1898">The volume of tone he emitted without effort, almost without the trouble of moving his lips, amazed me. </span>
      <span id="f1899">A voice! </span>
      <span id="f1900">a voice! </span>
      <span id="f1901">It was grave, profound, vibrating, while the man did not seem capable of a whisper. </span>
      <span id="f1902">However, he had enough strength in him--factitious no doubt--to very nearly make an end of us, as you shall hear directly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1903">&#34;The manager appeared silently in the doorway; I stepped out at once and he drew the curtain after me. </span>
      <span id="f1904">The Russian, eyed curiously by the pilgrims, was staring at the shore. </span>
      <span id="f1905">I followed the direction of his glance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1906">&#34;Dark human shapes could be made out in the distance, flitting indistinctly against the gloomy border of the forest, and near the river two bronze figures, leaning on tall spears, stood in the sunlight under fantastic headdresses of spotted skins, warlike and still in statuesque repose. </span>
      <span id="f1907">And from right to left along the lighted shore moved a wild and gorgeous apparition of a woman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1908">&#34;She walked with measured steps, draped in striped and fringed cloths, treading the earth proudly, with a slight jingle and flash of barbarous ornaments. </span>
      <span id="f1909">She carried her head high; her hair was done in the shape of a helmet; she had brass leggings to the knee, brass wire gauntlets to the elbow, a crimson spot on her tawny cheek, innumerable necklaces of glass beads on her neck; bizarre things, charms, gifts of witch-men, that hung about her, glittered and trembled at every step. </span>
      <span id="f1910">She must have had the value of several elephant tusks upon her. </span>
      <span id="f1911">She was savage and superb, wild-eyed and magnificent; there was something ominous and stately in her deliberate progress. </span>
      <span id="f1912">And in the hush that had fallen suddenly upon the whole sorrowful land, the immense wilderness, the colossal body of the fecund and mysterious life seemed to look at her, pensive, as though it had been looking at the image of its own tenebrous and passionate soul.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1913">&#34;She came abreast of the steamer, stood still, and faced us. </span>
      <span id="f1914">Her long shadow fell to the water&#39;s edge. </span>
      <span id="f1915">Her face had a tragic and fierce aspect of wild sorrow and of dumb pain mingled with the fear of some struggling, half-shaped resolve. </span>
      <span id="f1916">She stood looking at us without a stir and like the wilderness itself, with an air of brooding over an inscrutable purpose. </span>
      <span id="f1917">A whole minute passed, and then she made a step forward. </span>
      <span id="f1918">There was a low jingle, a glint of yellow metal, a sway of fringed draperies, and she stopped as if her heart had failed her. </span>
      <span id="f1919">The young fellow by my side growled. </span>
      <span id="f1920">The pilgrims murmured at my back. </span>
      <span id="f1921">She looked at us all as if her life had depended upon the unswerving steadiness of her glance. </span>
      <span id="f1922">Suddenly she opened her bared arms and threw them up rigid above her head, as though in an uncontrollable desire to touch the sky, and at the same time the swift shadows darted out on the earth, swept around on the river, gathering the steamer into a shadowy embrace. </span>
      <span id="f1923">A formidable silence hung over the scene.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1924">&#34;She turned away slowly, walked on, following the bank, and passed into the bushes to the left. </span>
      <span id="f1925">Once only her eyes gleamed back at us in the dusk of the thickets before she disappeared.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1926">&#34;&#39;If she had offered to come aboard I really think I would have tried to shoot her,&#39; said the man of patches, nervously. </span>
      <span id="f1927">&#39;I had been risking my life every day for the last fortnight to keep her out of the house. </span>
      <span id="f1928">She got in one day and kicked up a row about those miserable rags I picked up in the storeroom to mend my clothes with. </span>
      <span id="f1929">I wasn&#39;t decent. </span>
      <span id="f1930">At least it must have been that, for she talked like a fury to Kurtz for an hour, pointing at me now and then. </span>
      <span id="f1931">I don&#39;t understand the dialect of this tribe. </span>
      <span id="f1932">Luckily for me, I fancy Kurtz felt too ill that day to care, or there would have been mischief. </span>
      <span id="f1933">I don&#39;t understand. </span>
      <span id="f1934">. </span>
      <span id="f1935">. </span>
      <span id="f1936">. </span>
      <span id="f1937">No--it&#39;s too much for me. </span>
      <span id="f1938">Ah, well, it&#39;s all over now.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1939">&#34;At this moment I heard Kurtz&#39;s deep voice behind the curtain, &#39;Save me!--save the ivory, you mean. </span>
      <span id="f1940">Don&#39;t tell me. </span>
      <span id="f1941">Save _me!_ Why, I&#39;ve had to save you. </span>
      <span id="f1942">You are interrupting my plans now. </span>
      <span id="f1943">Sick! </span>
      <span id="f1944">Sick! </span>
      <span id="f1945">Not so sick as you would like to believe. </span>
      <span id="f1946">Never mind. </span>
      <span id="f1947">I&#39;ll carry my ideas out yet--I will return. </span>
      <span id="f1948">I&#39;ll show you what can be done. </span>
      <span id="f1949">You with your little peddling notions--you are interfering with me. </span>
      <span id="f1950">I will return. </span>
      <span id="f1951">I . </span>
      <span id="f1952">. </span>
      <span id="f1953">.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1954">&#34;The manager came out. </span>
      <span id="f1955">He did me the honor to take me under the arm and lead me aside. </span>
      <span id="f1956">&#39;He is very low, very low,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f1957">He considered it necessary to sigh, but neglected to be consistently sorrowful. </span>
      <span id="f1958">&#39;We have done all we could for him--haven&#39;t we? </span>
      <span id="f1959">But there is no disguising the fact, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1960">Kurtz has done more harm than good to the Company. </span>
      <span id="f1961">He did not see the time was not ripe for vigorous action. </span>
      <span id="f1962">Cautiously, cautiously--that&#39;s my principle. </span>
      <span id="f1963">We must be cautious yet. </span>
      <span id="f1964">The district is closed to us for a time. </span>
      <span id="f1965">Deplorable! </span>
      <span id="f1966">Upon the whole, the trade will suffer. </span>
      <span id="f1967">I don&#39;t deny there is a remarkable quantity of ivory--mostly fossil. </span>
      <span id="f1968">We must save it, at all events--but look how precarious the position is--and why? </span>
      <span id="f1969">Because the method is unsound.&#39; &#39;Do you,&#39; said I, looking at the shore, &#39;call it &#34;unsound method&#34;?&#39; &#39;Without doubt,&#39; he exclaimed, hotly. </span>
      <span id="f1970">&#39;Don&#39;t you?&#39; . </span>
      <span id="f1971">. </span>
      <span id="f1972">. </span>
      <span id="f1973">&#39;No method at all,&#39; I murmured after a while. </span>
      <span id="f1974">&#39;Exactly,&#39; he exulted. </span>
      <span id="f1975">&#39;I anticipated this. </span>
      <span id="f1976">Shows a complete want of judgment. </span>
      <span id="f1977">It is my duty to point it out in the proper quarter.&#39; &#39;Oh,&#39; said I, &#39;that fellow--what&#39;s his name?--the brickmaker, will make a readable report for you.&#39; He appeared confounded for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f1978">It seemed to me I had never breathed an atmosphere so vile, and I turned mentally to Kurtz for relief--positively for relief. </span>
      <span id="f1979">&#39;Nevertheless I think Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1980">Kurtz is a remarkable man,&#39; I said with emphasis. </span>
      <span id="f1981">He started, dropped on me a cold heavy glance, said very quietly, &#39;He _was_,&#39; and turned his back on me. </span>
      <span id="f1982">My hour of favor was over; I found myself lumped along with Kurtz as a partisan of methods for which the time was not ripe: I was unsound! </span>
      <span id="f1983">Ah! </span>
      <span id="f1984">but it was something to have at least a choice of nightmares.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1985">&#34;I had turned to the wilderness really, not to Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1986">Kurtz, who, I was ready to admit, was as good as buried. </span>
      <span id="f1987">And for a moment it seemed to me as if I also were buried in a vast grave full of unspeakable secrets. </span>
      <span id="f1988">I felt an intolerable weight oppressing my breast, the smell of the damp earth, the unseen presence of victorious corruption, the darkness of an impenetrable night. </span>
      <span id="f1989">. </span>
      <span id="f1990">. </span>
      <span id="f1991">. </span>
      <span id="f1992">The Russian tapped me on the shoulder. </span>
      <span id="f1993">I heard him mumbling and stammering something about &#39;brother seaman--couldn&#39;t conceal--knowledge of matters that would affect Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1994">Kurtz&#39;s reputation.&#39; I waited. </span>
      <span id="f1995">For him evidently Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1996">Kurtz was not in his grave; I suspect that for him Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1997">Kurtz was one of the immortals. </span>
      <span id="f1998">&#39;Well!&#39; said I at last, &#39;speak out. </span>
      <span id="f1999">As it happens, I am Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2000">Kurtz&#39;s friend--in a way.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2001">&#34;He stated with a good deal of formality that had we not been &#39;of the same profession,&#39; he would have kept the matter to himself without regard to consequences. </span>
      <span id="f2002">&#39;He suspected there was an active ill-will towards him on the part of these white men that--&#39; &#39;You are right,&#39; I said, remembering a certain conversation I had overheard. </span>
      <span id="f2003">&#39;The manager thinks you ought to be hanged.&#39; He showed a concern at this intelligence which amused me at first. </span>
      <span id="f2004">&#39;I had better get out of the way quietly,&#39; he said, earnestly. </span>
      <span id="f2005">&#39;I can do no more for Kurtz now, and they would soon find some excuse. </span>
      <span id="f2006">What&#39;s to stop them? </span>
      <span id="f2007">There&#39;s a military post three hundred miles from here.&#39; &#39;Well, upon my word,&#39; said I, &#39;perhaps you had better go if you have any friends amongst the savages near by.&#39; &#39;Plenty,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f2008">&#39;They are simple people--and I want nothing, you know.&#39; He stood biting his lips, then: &#39;I don&#39;t want any harm to happen to these whites here, but of course I was thinking of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2009">Kurtz&#39;s reputation--but you are a brother seaman and--&#39; &#39;All right,&#39; said I, after a time. </span>
      <span id="f2010">&#39;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2011">Kurtz&#39;s reputation is safe with me.&#39; I did not know how truly I spoke.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2012">&#34;He informed me, lowering his voice, that it was Kurtz who had ordered the attack to be made on the steamer. </span>
      <span id="f2013">&#39;He hated sometimes the idea of being taken away--and then again. </span>
      <span id="f2014">. </span>
      <span id="f2015">. </span>
      <span id="f2016">. </span>
      <span id="f2017">But I don&#39;t understand these matters. </span>
      <span id="f2018">I am a simple man. </span>
      <span id="f2019">He thought it would scare you away--that you would give it up, thinking him dead. </span>
      <span id="f2020">I could not stop him. </span>
      <span id="f2021">Oh, I had an awful time of it this last month.&#39; &#39;Very well,&#39; I said. </span>
      <span id="f2022">&#39;He is all right now.&#39; &#39;Ye-e-es,&#39; he muttered, not very convinced apparently. </span>
      <span id="f2023">&#39;Thanks,&#39; said I; &#39;I shall keep my eyes open.&#39; &#39;But quiet--eh?&#39; he urged, anxiously. </span>
      <span id="f2024">&#39;It would be awful for his reputation if anybody here--&#39; I promised a complete discretion with great gravity. </span>
      <span id="f2025">&#39;I have a canoe and three black fellows waiting not very far. </span>
      <span id="f2026">I am off. </span>
      <span id="f2027">Could you give me a few Martini-Henry cartridges?&#39; I could, and did, with proper secrecy. </span>
      <span id="f2028">He helped himself, with a wink at me, to a handful of my tobacco. </span>
      <span id="f2029">&#39;Between sailors--you know--good English tobacco.&#39; At the door of the pilot-house he turned round--&#39; I say, haven&#39;t you a pair of shoes you could spare?&#39; He raised one leg. </span>
      <span id="f2030">&#39;Look.&#39; The soles were tied with knotted strings sandal-wise under his bare feet. </span>
      <span id="f2031">I rooted out an old pair, at which he looked with admiration before tucking it under his left arm. </span>
      <span id="f2032">One of his pockets (bright red) was bulging with cartridges, from the other (dark blue) peeped &#39;Towson&#39;s Inquiry,&#39; &amp;c., &amp;c. </span>
      <span id="f2033">He seemed to think himself excellently well equipped for a renewed encounter with the wilderness. </span>
      <span id="f2034">&#39;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f2035">I&#39;ll never, never meet such a man again. </span>
      <span id="f2036">You ought to have heard him recite poetry--his own too it was, he told me. </span>
      <span id="f2037">Poetry!&#39; He rolled his eyes at the recollection of these delights. </span>
      <span id="f2038">&#39;Oh, he enlarged my mind!&#39; &#39;Goodby,&#39; said I. </span>
      <span id="f2039">He shook hands and vanished in the night. </span>
      <span id="f2040">Sometimes I ask myself whether I had ever really seen him--whether it was possible to meet such a phenomenon! </span>
      <span id="f2041">. </span>
      <span id="f2042">. </span>
      <span id="f2043">.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2044">&#34;When I woke up shortly after midnight his warning came to my mind with its hint of danger that seemed, in the starred darkness, real enough to make me get up for the purpose of having a look round. </span>
      <span id="f2045">On the hill a big fire burned, illuminating fitfully a crooked corner of the station-house. </span>
      <span id="f2046">One of the agents with a picket of a few of our blacks, armed for the purpose, was keeping guard over the ivory; but deep within the forest, red gleams that wavered, that seemed to sink and rise from the ground amongst confused columnar shapes of intense blackness, showed the exact position of the camp where Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2047">Kurtz&#39;s adorers were keeping their uneasy vigil. </span>
      <span id="f2048">The monotonous beating of a big drum filled the air with muffled shocks and a lingering vibration. </span>
      <span id="f2049">A steady droning sound of many men chanting each to himself some weird incantation came out from the black, flat wall of the woods as the humming of bees comes out of a hive, and had a strange narcotic effect upon my half-awake senses. </span>
      <span id="f2050">I believe I dozed off leaning over the rail, till an abrupt burst of yells, an overwhelming outbreak of a pent-up and mysterious frenzy, woke me up in a bewildered wonder. </span>
      <span id="f2051">It was cut short all at once, and the low droning went on with an effect of audible and soothing silence. </span>
      <span id="f2052">I glanced casually into the little cabin. </span>
      <span id="f2053">A light was burning within, but Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2054">Kurtz was not there.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2055">&#34;I think I would have raised an outcry if I had believed my eyes. </span>
      <span id="f2056">But I didn&#39;t believe them at first--the thing seemed so impossible. </span>
      <span id="f2057">The fact is I was completely unnerved by a sheer blank fright, pure abstract terror, unconnected with any distinct shape of physical danger. </span>
      <span id="f2058">What made this emotion so overpowering was--how shall I define it?--the moral shock I received, as if something altogether monstrous, intolerable to thought and odious to the soul, had been thrust upon me unexpectedly. </span>
      <span id="f2059">This lasted of course the merest fraction of a second, and then the usual sense of commonplace, deadly danger, the possibility of a sudden onslaught and massacre, or something of the kind, which I saw impending, was positively welcome and composing. </span>
      <span id="f2060">It pacified me, in fact, so much, that I did not raise an alarm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2061">&#34;There was an agent buttoned up inside an ulster and sleeping on a chair on deck within three feet of me. </span>
      <span id="f2062">The yells had not awakened him; he snored very slightly; I left him to his slumbers and leaped ashore. </span>
      <span id="f2063">I did not betray Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2064">Kurtz--it was ordered I should never betray him--it was written I should be loyal to the nightmare of my choice. </span>
      <span id="f2065">I was anxious to deal with this shadow by myself alone,--and to this day I don&#39;t know why I was so jealous of sharing with anyone the peculiar blackness of that experience.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2066">&#34;As soon as I got on the bank I saw a trail--a broad trail through the grass. </span>
      <span id="f2067">I remember the exultation with which I said to myself, &#39;He can&#39;t walk--he is crawling on all-fours--I&#39;ve got him.&#39; The grass was wet with dew. </span>
      <span id="f2068">I strode rapidly with clenched fists. </span>
      <span id="f2069">I fancy I had some vague notion of falling upon him and giving him a drubbing. </span>
      <span id="f2070">I don&#39;t know. </span>
      <span id="f2071">I had some imbecile thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f2072">The knitting old woman with the cat obtruded herself upon my memory as a most improper person to be sitting at the other end of such an affair. </span>
      <span id="f2073">I saw a row of pilgrims squirting lead in the air out of Winchesters held to the hip. </span>
      <span id="f2074">I thought I would never get back to the steamer, and imagined myself living alone and unarmed in the woods to an advanced age. </span>
      <span id="f2075">Such silly things--you know. </span>
      <span id="f2076">And I remember I confounded the beat of the drum with the beating of my heart, and was pleased at its calm regularity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2077">&#34;I kept to the track though--then stopped to listen. </span>
      <span id="f2078">The night was very clear: a dark blue space, sparkling with dew and starlight, in which black things stood very still. </span>
      <span id="f2079">I thought I could see a kind of motion ahead of me. </span>
      <span id="f2080">I was strangely cocksure of everything that night. </span>
      <span id="f2081">I actually left the track and ran in a wide semicircle (I verily believe chuckling to myself) so as to get in front of that stir, of that motion I had seen--if indeed I had seen anything. </span>
      <span id="f2082">I was circumventing Kurtz as though it had been a boyish game.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2083">&#34;I came upon him, and, if he had not heard me coming, I would have fallen over him too, but he got up in time. </span>
      <span id="f2084">He rose, unsteady, long, pale, indistinct, like a vapor exhaled by the earth, and swayed slightly, misty and silent before me; while at my back the fires loomed between the trees, and the murmur of many voices issued from the forest. </span>
      <span id="f2085">I had cut him off cleverly; but when actually confronting him I seemed to come to my senses, I saw the danger in its right proportion. </span>
      <span id="f2086">It was by no means over yet. </span>
      <span id="f2087">Suppose he began to shout? </span>
      <span id="f2088">Though he could hardly stand, there was still plenty of vigor in his voice. </span>
      <span id="f2089">&#39;Go away--hide yourself,&#39; he said, in that profound tone. </span>
      <span id="f2090">It was very awful. </span>
      <span id="f2091">I glanced back. </span>
      <span id="f2092">We were within thirty yards from the nearest fire. </span>
      <span id="f2093">A black figure stood up, strode on long black legs, waving long black arms, across the glow. </span>
      <span id="f2094">It had horns--antelope horns, I think--on its head. </span>
      <span id="f2095">Some sorcerer, some witch-man, no doubt: it looked fiend-like enough. </span>
      <span id="f2096">&#39;Do you know what you are doing?&#39; I whispered. </span>
      <span id="f2097">&#39;Perfectly,&#39; he answered, raising his voice for that single word: it sounded to me far off and yet loud, like a hail through a speaking-trumpet. </span>
      <span id="f2098">&#39;If he makes a row we are lost,&#39; I thought to myself. </span>
      <span id="f2099">This clearly was not a case for fisticuffs, even apart from the very natural aversion I had to beat that Shadow--this wandering and tormented thing. </span>
      <span id="f2100">&#39;You will be lost,&#39; I said--&#39;utterly lost.&#39; One gets sometimes such a flash of inspiration, you know. </span>
      <span id="f2101">I did say the right thing, though indeed he could not have been more irretrievably lost than he was at this very moment, when the foundations of our intimacy were being laid--to endure--to endure--even to the end--even beyond.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2102">&#34;&#39;I had immense plans,&#39; he muttered irresolutely. </span>
      <span id="f2103">&#39;Yes,&#39; said I; &#39;but if you try to shout I&#39;ll smash your head with--&#39; There was not a stick or a stone near. </span>
      <span id="f2104">&#39;I will throttle you for good,&#39; I corrected myself. </span>
      <span id="f2105">&#39;I was on the threshold of great things,&#39; he pleaded, in a voice of longing, with a wistfulness of tone that made my blood run cold. </span>
      <span id="f2106">&#39;And now for this stupid scoundrel--&#39; &#39;Your success in Europe is assured in any case,&#39; I affirmed, steadily. </span>
      <span id="f2107">I did not want to have the throttling of him, you understand--and indeed it would have been very little use for any practical purpose. </span>
      <span id="f2108">I tried to break the spell--the heavy, mute spell of the wilderness--that seemed to draw him to its pitiless breast by the awakening of forgotten and brutal instincts, by the memory of gratified and monstrous passions. </span>
      <span id="f2109">This alone, I was convinced, had driven him out to the edge of the forest, to the bush, towards the gleam of fires, the throb of drums, the drone of weird incantations; this alone had beguiled his unlawful soul beyond the bounds of permitted aspirations. </span>
      <span id="f2110">And, don&#39;t you see, the terror of the position was not in being knocked on the head--though I had a very lively sense of that danger too--but in this, that I had to deal with a being to whom I could not appeal in the name of anything high or low. </span>
      <span id="f2111">I had, even like the niggers, to invoke him--himself his own exalted and incredible degradation. </span>
      <span id="f2112">There was nothing either above or below him, and I knew it. </span>
      <span id="f2113">He had kicked himself loose of the earth. </span>
      <span id="f2114">Confound the man! </span>
      <span id="f2115">he had kicked the very earth to pieces. </span>
      <span id="f2116">He was alone, and I before him did not know whether I stood on the ground or floated in the air. </span>
      <span id="f2117">I&#39;ve been telling you what we said--repeating the phrases we pronounced,--but what&#39;s the good? </span>
      <span id="f2118">They were common everyday words,--the familiar, vague sounds exchanged on every waking day of life. </span>
      <span id="f2119">But what of that? </span>
      <span id="f2120">They had behind them, to my mind, the terrific suggestiveness of words heard in dreams, of phrases spoken in nightmares. </span>
      <span id="f2121">Soul! </span>
      <span id="f2122">If anybody had ever struggled with a soul, I am the man. </span>
      <span id="f2123">And I wasn&#39;t arguing with a lunatic either. </span>
      <span id="f2124">Believe me or not, his intelligence was perfectly clear--concentrated, it is true, upon himself with horrible intensity, yet clear; and therein was my only chance--barring, of course, the killing him there and then, which wasn&#39;t so good, on account of unavoidable noise. </span>
      <span id="f2125">But his soul was mad. </span>
      <span id="f2126">Being alone in the wilderness, it had looked within itself, and, by heavens! </span>
      <span id="f2127">I tell you, it had gone mad. </span>
      <span id="f2128">I had--for my sins, I suppose--to go through the ordeal of looking into it myself. </span>
      <span id="f2129">No eloquence could have been so withering to one&#39;s belief in mankind as his final burst of sincerity. </span>
      <span id="f2130">He struggled with himself, too. </span>
      <span id="f2131">I saw it,--I heard it. </span>
      <span id="f2132">I saw the inconceivable mystery of a soul that knew no restraint, no faith, and no fear, yet struggling blindly with itself. </span>
      <span id="f2133">I kept my head pretty well; but when I had him at last stretched on the couch, I wiped my forehead, while my legs shook under me as though I had carried half a ton on my back down that hill. </span>
      <span id="f2134">And yet I had only supported him, his bony arm clasped round my neck--and he was not much heavier than a child.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>