<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>Chapter III. Part 2</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f2135">Chapter III. Part 2</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f2137">&#34;When next day we left at noon, the crowd, of whose presence behind the curtain of trees I had been acutely conscious all the time, flowed out of the woods again, filled the clearing, covered the slope with a mass of naked, breathing, quivering, bronze bodies. </span>
      <span id="f2138">I steamed up a bit, then swung down-stream, and two thousand eyes followed the evolutions of the splashing, thumping, fierce river-demon beating the water with its terrible tail and breathing black smoke into the air. </span>
      <span id="f2139">In front of the first rank, along the river, three men, plastered with bright red earth from head to foot, strutted to and fro restlessly. </span>
      <span id="f2140">When we came abreast again, they faced the river, stamped their feet, nodded their horned heads, swayed their scarlet bodies; they shook towards the fierce river-demon a bunch of black feathers, a mangy skin with a pendent tail--something that looked like a dried gourd; they shouted periodically together strings of amazing words that resembled no sounds of human language; and the deep murmurs of the crowd, interrupted suddenly, were like the response of some satanic litany.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2141">&#34;We had carried Kurtz into the pilot-house: there was more air there. </span>
      <span id="f2142">Lying on the couch, he stared through the open shutter. </span>
      <span id="f2143">There was an eddy in the mass of human bodies, and the woman with helmeted head and tawny cheeks rushed out to the very brink of the stream. </span>
      <span id="f2144">She put out her hands, shouted something, and all that wild mob took up the shout in a roaring chorus of articulated, rapid, breathless utterance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2145">&#34;&#39;Do you understand this?&#39; I asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2146">&#34;He kept on looking out past me with fiery, longing eyes, with a mingled expression of wistfulness and hate. </span>
      <span id="f2147">He made no answer, but I saw a smile, a smile of indefinable meaning, appear on his colorless lips that a moment after twitched convulsively. </span>
      <span id="f2148">&#39;Do I not?&#39; he said slowly, gasping, as if the words had been torn out of him by a supernatural power.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2149">&#34;I pulled the string of the whistle, and I did this because I saw the pilgrims on deck getting out their rifles with an air of anticipating a jolly lark. </span>
      <span id="f2150">At the sudden screech there was a movement of abject terror through that wedged mass of bodies. </span>
      <span id="f2151">&#39;Don&#39;t! </span>
      <span id="f2152">Don&#39;t you frighten them away,&#39; cried someone on deck disconsolately. </span>
      <span id="f2153">I pulled the string time after time. </span>
      <span id="f2154">They broke and ran, they leaped, they crouched, they swerved, they dodged the flying terror of the sound. </span>
      <span id="f2155">The three red chaps had fallen flat, face down on the shore, as though they had been shot dead. </span>
      <span id="f2156">Only the barbarous and superb woman did not so much as flinch, and stretched tragically her bare arms after us over the somber and glittering river.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2157">&#34;And then that imbecile crowd down on the deck started their little fun, and I could see nothing more for smoke.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2158">&#34;The brown current ran swiftly out of the heart of darkness, bearing us down towards the sea with twice the speed of our upward progress; and Kurtz&#39;s life was running swiftly too, ebbing, ebbing out of his heart into the sea of inexorable time. </span>
      <span id="f2159">The manager was very placid, he had no vital anxieties now, he took us both in with a comprehensive and satisfied glance: the &#39;affair&#39; had come off as well as could be wished. </span>
      <span id="f2160">I saw the time approaching when I would be left alone of the party of &#39;unsound method.&#39; The pilgrims looked upon me with disfavor. </span>
      <span id="f2161">I was, so to speak, numbered with the dead. </span>
      <span id="f2162">It is strange how I accepted this unforeseen partnership, this choice of nightmares forced upon me in the tenebrous land invaded by these mean and greedy phantoms.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2163">&#34;Kurtz discoursed. </span>
      <span id="f2164">A voice! </span>
      <span id="f2165">a voice! </span>
      <span id="f2166">It rang deep to the very last. </span>
      <span id="f2167">It survived his strength to hide in the magnificent folds of eloquence the barren darkness of his heart. </span>
      <span id="f2168">Oh, he struggled! </span>
      <span id="f2169">he struggled! </span>
      <span id="f2170">The wastes of his weary brain were haunted by shadowy images now--images of wealth and fame revolving obsequiously round his unextinguishable gift of noble and lofty expression. </span>
      <span id="f2171">My Intended, my station, my career, my ideas--these were the subjects for the occasional utterances of elevated sentiments. </span>
      <span id="f2172">The shade of the original Kurtz frequented the bedside of the hollow sham, whose fate it was to be buried presently in the mold of primeval earth. </span>
      <span id="f2173">But both the diabolic love and the unearthly hate of the mysteries it had penetrated fought for the possession of that soul satiated with primitive emotions, avid of lying fame, of sham distinction, of all the appearances of success and power.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2174">&#34;Sometimes he was contemptibly childish. </span>
      <span id="f2175">He desired to have kings meet him at railway-stations on his return from some ghastly Nowhere, where he intended to accomplish great things. </span>
      <span id="f2176">&#39;You show them you have in you something that is really profitable, and then there will be no limits to the recognition of your ability,&#39; he would say. </span>
      <span id="f2177">&#39;Of course you must take care of the motives--right motives--always.&#39; The long reaches that were like one and the same reach, monotonous bends that were exactly alike, slipped past the steamer with their multitude of secular trees looking patiently after this grimy fragment of another world, the forerunner of change, of conquest, of trade, of massacres, of blessings. </span>
      <span id="f2178">I looked ahead--piloting. </span>
      <span id="f2179">&#39;Close the shutter,&#39; said Kurtz suddenly one day; &#39;I can&#39;t bear to look at this.&#39; I did so. </span>
      <span id="f2180">There was a silence. </span>
      <span id="f2181">&#39;Oh, but I will wring your heart yet!&#39; he cried at the invisible wilderness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2182">&#34;We broke down--as I had expected--and had to lie up for repairs at the head of an island. </span>
      <span id="f2183">This delay was the first thing that shook Kurtz&#39;s confidence. </span>
      <span id="f2184">One morning he gave me a packet of papers and a photograph,--the lot tied together with a shoe-string. </span>
      <span id="f2185">&#39;Keep this for me,&#39; he said. </span>
      <span id="f2186">&#39;This noxious fool&#39; (meaning the manager) &#39;is capable of prying into my boxes when I am not looking.&#39; In the afternoon I saw him. </span>
      <span id="f2187">He was lying on his back with closed eyes, and I withdrew quietly, but I heard him mutter, &#39;Live rightly, die, die . </span>
      <span id="f2188">. </span>
      <span id="f2189">.&#39; I listened. </span>
      <span id="f2190">There was nothing more. </span>
      <span id="f2191">Was he rehearsing some speech in his sleep, or was it a fragment of a phrase from some newspaper article? </span>
      <span id="f2192">He had been writing for the papers and meant to do so again, &#39;for the furthering of my ideas. </span>
      <span id="f2193">It&#39;s a duty.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2194">&#34;His was an impenetrable darkness. </span>
      <span id="f2195">I looked at him as you peer down at a man who is lying at the bottom of a precipice where the sun never shines. </span>
      <span id="f2196">But I had not much time to give him, because I was helping the engine-driver to take to pieces the leaky cylinders, to straighten a bent connecting-rod, and in other such matters. </span>
      <span id="f2197">I lived in an infernal mess of rust, filings, nuts, bolts, spanners, hammers, ratchet-drills--things I abominate, because I don&#39;t get on with them. </span>
      <span id="f2198">I tended the little forge we fortunately had aboard; I toiled wearily in a wretched scrap-heap--unless I had the shakes too bad to stand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2199">&#34;One evening coming in with a candle I was startled to hear him say a little tremulously, &#39;I am lying here in the dark waiting for death.&#39; The light was within a foot of his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f2200">I forced myself to murmur, &#39;Oh, nonsense!&#39; and stood over him as if transfixed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2201">&#34;Anything approaching the change that came over his features I have never seen before, and hope never to see again. </span>
      <span id="f2202">Oh, I wasn&#39;t touched. </span>
      <span id="f2203">I was fascinated. </span>
      <span id="f2204">It was as though a veil had been rent. </span>
      <span id="f2205">I saw on that ivory face the expression of somber pride, of ruthless power, of craven terror--of an intense and hopeless despair. </span>
      <span id="f2206">Did he live his life again in every detail of desire, temptation, and surrender during that supreme moment of complete knowledge? </span>
      <span id="f2207">He cried in a whisper at some image, at some vision,--he cried out twice, a cry that was no more than a breath--</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2208">&#34;&#39;The horror! </span>
      <span id="f2209">The horror!&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2210">&#34;I blew the candle out and left the cabin. </span>
      <span id="f2211">The pilgrims were dining in the mess-room, and I took my place opposite the manager, who lifted his eyes to give me a questioning glance, which I successfully ignored. </span>
      <span id="f2212">He leaned back, serene, with that peculiar smile of his sealing the unexpressed depths of his meanness. </span>
      <span id="f2213">A continuous shower of small flies streamed upon the lamp, upon the cloth, upon our hands and faces. </span>
      <span id="f2214">Suddenly the manager&#39;s boy put his insolent black head in the doorway, and said in a tone of scathing contempt--</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2215">&#34;&#39;Mistah Kurtz--he dead.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2216">&#34;All the pilgrims rushed out to see. </span>
      <span id="f2217">I remained, and went on with my dinner. </span>
      <span id="f2218">I believe I was considered brutally callous. </span>
      <span id="f2219">However, I did not eat much. </span>
      <span id="f2220">There was a lamp in there--light, don&#39;t you know--and outside it was so beastly, beastly dark. </span>
      <span id="f2221">I went no more near the remarkable man who had pronounced a judgment upon the adventures of his soul on this earth. </span>
      <span id="f2222">The voice was gone. </span>
      <span id="f2223">What else had been there? </span>
      <span id="f2224">But I am of course aware that next day the pilgrims buried something in a muddy hole.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2225">&#34;And then they very nearly buried me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2226">&#34;However, as you see, I did not go to join Kurtz there and then. </span>
      <span id="f2227">I did not. </span>
      <span id="f2228">I remained to dream the nightmare out to the end, and to show my loyalty to Kurtz once more. </span>
      <span id="f2229">Destiny. </span>
      <span id="f2230">My destiny! </span>
      <span id="f2231">Droll thing life is--that mysterious arrangement of merciless logic for a futile purpose. </span>
      <span id="f2232">The most you can hope from it is some knowledge of yourself--that comes too late--a crop of unextinguishable regrets. </span>
      <span id="f2233">I have wrestled with death. </span>
      <span id="f2234">It is the most unexciting contest you can imagine. </span>
      <span id="f2235">It takes place in an impalpable grayness, with nothing underfoot, with nothing around, without spectators, without clamor, without glory, without the great desire of victory, without the great fear of defeat, in a sickly atmosphere of tepid skepticism, without much belief in your own right, and still less in that of your adversary. </span>
      <span id="f2236">If such is the form of ultimate wisdom, then life is a greater riddle than some of us think it to be. </span>
      <span id="f2237">I was within a hair&#39;s-breadth of the last opportunity for pronouncement, and I found with humiliation that probably I would have nothing to say. </span>
      <span id="f2238">This is the reason why I affirm that Kurtz was a remarkable man. </span>
      <span id="f2239">He had something to say. </span>
      <span id="f2240">He said it. </span>
      <span id="f2241">Since I had peeped over the edge myself, I understand better the meaning of his stare, that could not see the flame of the candle, but was wide enough to embrace the whole universe, piercing enough to penetrate all the hearts that beat in the darkness. </span>
      <span id="f2242">He had summed up--he had judged. </span>
      <span id="f2243">&#39;The horror!&#39; He was a remarkable man. </span>
      <span id="f2244">After all, this was the expression of some sort of belief; it had candor, it had conviction, it had a vibrating note of revolt in its whisper, it had the appalling face of a glimpsed truth--the strange commingling of desire and hate. </span>
      <span id="f2245">And it is not my own extremity I remember best--a vision of grayness without form filled with physical pain, and a careless contempt for the evanescence of all things--even of this pain itself. </span>
      <span id="f2246">No! </span>
      <span id="f2247">It is his extremity that I seem to have lived through. </span>
      <span id="f2248">True, he had made that last stride, he had stepped over the edge, while I had been permitted to draw back my hesitating foot. </span>
      <span id="f2249">And perhaps in this is the whole difference; perhaps all the wisdom, and all truth, and all sincerity, are just compressed into that inappreciable moment of time in which we step over the threshold of the invisible. </span>
      <span id="f2250">Perhaps! </span>
      <span id="f2251">I like to think my summing-up would not have been a word of careless contempt. </span>
      <span id="f2252">Better his cry--much better. </span>
      <span id="f2253">It was an affirmation, a moral victory paid for by innumerable defeats, by abominable terrors, by abominable satisfactions. </span>
      <span id="f2254">But it was a victory! </span>
      <span id="f2255">That is why I have remained loyal to Kurtz to the last, and even beyond, when a long time after I heard once more, not his own voice, but the echo of his magnificent eloquence thrown to me from a soul as translucently pure as a cliff of crystal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2256">&#34;No, they did not bury me, though there is a period of time which I remember mistily, with a shuddering wonder, like a passage through some inconceivable world that had no hope in it and no desire. </span>
      <span id="f2257">I found myself back in the sepulchral city resenting the sight of people hurrying through the streets to filch a little money from each other, to devour their infamous cookery, to gulp their unwholesome beer, to dream their insignificant and silly dreams. </span>
      <span id="f2258">They trespassed upon my thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f2259">They were intruders whose knowledge of life was to me an irritating pretense, because I felt so sure they could not possibly know the things I knew. </span>
      <span id="f2260">Their bearing, which was simply the bearing of commonplace individuals going about their business in the assurance of perfect safety, was offensive to me like the outrageous flauntings of folly in the face of a danger it is unable to comprehend. </span>
      <span id="f2261">I had no particular desire to enlighten them, but I had some difficulty in restraining myself from laughing in their faces, so full of stupid importance. </span>
      <span id="f2262">I dare say I was not very well at that time. </span>
      <span id="f2263">I tottered about the streets--there were various affairs to settle--grinning bitterly at perfectly respectable persons. </span>
      <span id="f2264">I admit my behavior was inexcusable, but then my temperature was seldom normal in these days. </span>
      <span id="f2265">My dear aunt&#39;s endeavors to &#39;nurse up my strength&#39; seemed altogether beside the mark. </span>
      <span id="f2266">It was not my strength that wanted nursing, it was my imagination that wanted soothing. </span>
      <span id="f2267">I kept the bundle of papers given me by Kurtz, not knowing exactly what to do with it. </span>
      <span id="f2268">His mother had died lately, watched over, as I was told, by his Intended. </span>
      <span id="f2269">A clean-shaved man, with an official manner and wearing gold-rimmed spectacles, called on me one day and made inquiries, at first circuitous, afterwards suavely pressing, about what he was pleased to denominate certain &#39;documents.&#39; I was not surprised, because I had had two rows with the manager on the subject out there. </span>
      <span id="f2270">I had refused to give up the smallest scrap out of that package, and I took the same attitude with the spectacled man. </span>
      <span id="f2271">He became darkly menacing at last, and with much heat argued that the Company had the right to every bit of information about its &#39;territories.&#39; And, said he, &#39;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2272">Kurtz&#39;s knowledge of unexplored regions must have been necessarily extensive and peculiar--owing to his great abilities and to the deplorable circumstances in which he had been placed: therefore&#39;--I assured him Mr. </span>
      <span id="f2273">Kurtz&#39;s knowledge, however extensive, did not bear upon the problems of commerce or administration. </span>
      <span id="f2274">He invoked then the name of science. </span>
      <span id="f2275">&#39;It would be an incalculable loss if,&#39; &amp;c., &amp;c. </span>
      <span id="f2276">I offered him the report on the &#39;Suppression of Savage Customs,&#39; with the postscriptum torn off. </span>
      <span id="f2277">He took it up eagerly, but ended by sniffing at it with an air of contempt. </span>
      <span id="f2278">&#39;This is not what we had a right to expect,&#39; he remarked. </span>
      <span id="f2279">&#39;Expect nothing else,&#39; I said. </span>
      <span id="f2280">&#39;There are only private letters.&#39; He withdrew upon some threat of legal proceedings, and I saw him no more; but another fellow, calling himself Kurtz&#39;s cousin, appeared two days later, and was anxious to hear all the details about his dear relative&#39;s last moments. </span>
      <span id="f2281">Incidentally he gave me to understand that Kurtz had been essentially a great musician. </span>
      <span id="f2282">&#39;There was the making of an immense success,&#39; said the man, who was an organist, I believe, with lank gray hair flowing over a greasy coat-collar. </span>
      <span id="f2283">I had no reason to doubt his statement; and to this day I am unable to say what was Kurtz&#39;s profession, whether he ever had any--which was the greatest of his talents. </span>
      <span id="f2284">I had taken him for a painter who wrote for the papers, or else for a journalist who could paint--but even the cousin (who took snuff during the interview) could not tell me what he had been--exactly. </span>
      <span id="f2285">He was a universal genius--on that point I agreed with the old chap, who thereupon blew his nose noisily into a large cotton handkerchief and withdrew in senile agitation, bearing off some family letters and memoranda without importance. </span>
      <span id="f2286">Ultimately a journalist anxious to know something of the fate of his &#39;dear colleague&#39; turned up. </span>
      <span id="f2287">This visitor informed me Kurtz&#39;s proper sphere ought to have been politics &#39;on the popular side.&#39; He had furry straight eyebrows, bristly hair cropped short, an eye-glass on a broad ribbon, and, becoming expansive, confessed his opinion that Kurtz really couldn&#39;t write a bit--&#39;but heavens! </span>
      <span id="f2288">how that man could talk! </span>
      <span id="f2289">He electrified large meetings. </span>
      <span id="f2290">He had faith--don&#39;t you see?--he had the faith. </span>
      <span id="f2291">He could get himself to believe anything--anything. </span>
      <span id="f2292">He would have been a splendid leader of an extreme party.&#39; &#39;What party?&#39; I asked. </span>
      <span id="f2293">&#39;Any party,&#39; answered the other. </span>
      <span id="f2294">&#39;He was an--an--extremist.&#39; Did I not think so? </span>
      <span id="f2295">I assented. </span>
      <span id="f2296">Did I know, he asked, with a sudden flash of curiosity, &#39;what it was that had induced him to go out there?&#39; &#39;Yes,&#39; said I, and forthwith handed him the famous Report for publication, if he thought fit. </span>
      <span id="f2297">He glanced through it hurriedly, mumbling all the time, judged &#39;it would do,&#39; and took himself off with this plunder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2298">&#34;Thus I was left at last with a slim packet of letters and the girl&#39;s portrait. </span>
      <span id="f2299">She struck me as beautiful--I mean she had a beautiful expression. </span>
      <span id="f2300">I know that the sunlight can be made to lie too, yet one felt that no manipulation of light and pose could have conveyed the delicate shade of truthfulness upon those features. </span>
      <span id="f2301">She seemed ready to listen without mental reservation, without suspicion, without a thought for herself. </span>
      <span id="f2302">I concluded I would go and give her back her portrait and those letters myself. </span>
      <span id="f2303">Curiosity? </span>
      <span id="f2304">Yes; and also some other feeling perhaps. </span>
      <span id="f2305">All that had been Kurtz&#39;s had passed out of my hands: his soul, his body, his station, his plans, his ivory, his career. </span>
      <span id="f2306">There remained only his memory and his Intended--and I wanted to give that up too to the past, in a way,--to surrender personally all that remained of him with me to that oblivion which is the last word of our common fate. </span>
      <span id="f2307">I don&#39;t defend myself. </span>
      <span id="f2308">I had no clear perception of what it was I really wanted. </span>
      <span id="f2309">Perhaps it was an impulse of unconscious loyalty, or the fulfillment of one of these ironic necessities that lurk in the facts of human existence. </span>
      <span id="f2310">I don&#39;t know. </span>
      <span id="f2311">I can&#39;t tell. </span>
      <span id="f2312">But I went.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2313">&#34;I thought his memory was like the other memories of the dead that accumulate in every man&#39;s life,--a vague impress on the brain of shadows that had fallen on it in their swift and final passage; but before the high and ponderous door, between the tall houses of a street as still and decorous as a well-kept alley in a cemetery, I had a vision of him on the stretcher, opening his mouth voraciously, as if to devour all the earth with all its mankind. </span>
      <span id="f2314">He lived then before me; he lived as much as he had ever lived--a shadow insatiable of splendid appearances, of frightful realities; a shadow darker than the shadow of the night, and draped nobly in the folds of a gorgeous eloquence. </span>
      <span id="f2315">The vision seemed to enter the house with me--the stretcher, the phantom-bearers, the wild crowd of obedient worshipers, the gloom of the forests, the glitter of the reach between the murky bends, the beat of the drum, regular and muffled like the beating of a heart--the heart of a conquering darkness. </span>
      <span id="f2316">It was a moment of triumph for the wilderness, an invading and vengeful rush which, it seemed to me, I would have to keep back alone for the salvation of another soul. </span>
      <span id="f2317">And the memory of what I had heard him say afar there, with the horned shapes stirring at my back, in the glow of fires, within the patient woods, those broken phrases came back to me, were heard again in their ominous and terrifying simplicity. </span>
      <span id="f2318">I remembered his abject pleading, his abject threats, the colossal scale of his vile desires, the meanness, the torment, the tempestuous anguish of his soul. </span>
      <span id="f2319">And later on I seemed to see his collected languid manner, when he said one day, &#39;This lot of ivory now is really mine. </span>
      <span id="f2320">The Company did not pay for it. </span>
      <span id="f2321">I collected it myself at a very great personal risk. </span>
      <span id="f2322">I am afraid they will try to claim it as theirs though. </span>
      <span id="f2323">H&#39;m. </span>
      <span id="f2324">It is a difficult case. </span>
      <span id="f2325">What do you think I ought to do--resist? </span>
      <span id="f2326">Eh? </span>
      <span id="f2327">I want no more than justice.&#39; . </span>
      <span id="f2328">. </span>
      <span id="f2329">. </span>
      <span id="f2330">He wanted no more than justice--no more than justice. </span>
      <span id="f2331">I rang the bell before a mahogany door on the first floor, and while I waited he seemed to stare at me out of the glassy panel--stare with that wide and immense stare embracing, condemning, loathing all the universe. </span>
      <span id="f2332">I seemed to hear the whispered cry, &#39;The horror! </span>
      <span id="f2333">The horror!&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2334">&#34;The dusk was falling. </span>
      <span id="f2335">I had to wait in a lofty drawing-room with three long windows from floor to ceiling that were like three luminous and bedraped columns. </span>
      <span id="f2336">The bent gilt legs and backs of the furniture shone in indistinct curves. </span>
      <span id="f2337">The tall marble fireplace had a cold and monumental whiteness. </span>
      <span id="f2338">A grand piano stood massively in a corner, with dark gleams on the flat surfaces like a somber and polished sarcophagus. </span>
      <span id="f2339">A high door opened--closed. </span>
      <span id="f2340">I rose.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2341">&#34;She came forward, all in black, with a pale head, floating towards me in the dusk. </span>
      <span id="f2342">She was in mourning. </span>
      <span id="f2343">It was more than a year since his death, more than a year since the news came; she seemed as though she would remember and mourn for ever. </span>
      <span id="f2344">She took both my hands in hers and murmured, &#39;I had heard you were coming.&#39; I noticed she was not very young--I mean not girlish. </span>
      <span id="f2345">She had a mature capacity for fidelity, for belief, for suffering. </span>
      <span id="f2346">The room seemed to have grown darker, as if all the sad light of the cloudy evening had taken refuge on her forehead. </span>
      <span id="f2347">This fair hair, this pale visage, this pure brow, seemed surrounded by an ashy halo from which the dark eyes looked out at me. </span>
      <span id="f2348">Their glance was guileless, profound, confident, and trustful. </span>
      <span id="f2349">She carried her sorrowful head as though she were proud of that sorrow, as though she would say, &#39;I--I alone know how to mourn for him as he deserves.&#39; But while we were still shaking hands, such a look of awful desolation came upon her face that I perceived she was one of those creatures that are not the playthings of Time. </span>
      <span id="f2350">For her he had died only yesterday. </span>
      <span id="f2351">And, by Jove! </span>
      <span id="f2352">the impression was so powerful that for me too he seemed to have died only yesterday--nay, this very minute. </span>
      <span id="f2353">I saw her and him in the same instant of time--his death and her sorrow--I saw her sorrow in the very moment of his death. </span>
      <span id="f2354">Do you understand? </span>
      <span id="f2355">I saw them together--I heard them together. </span>
      <span id="f2356">She had said, with a deep catch of the breath, &#39;I have survived;&#39; while my strained ears seemed to hear distinctly, mingled with her tone of despairing regret, the summing-up whisper of his eternal condemnation. </span>
      <span id="f2357">I asked myself what I was doing there, with a sensation of panic in my heart as though I had blundered into a place of cruel and absurd mysteries not fit for a human being to behold. </span>
      <span id="f2358">She motioned me to a chair. </span>
      <span id="f2359">We sat down. </span>
      <span id="f2360">I laid the packet gently on the little table, and she put her hand over it. </span>
      <span id="f2361">. </span>
      <span id="f2362">. </span>
      <span id="f2363">. </span>
      <span id="f2364">&#39;You knew him well,&#39; she murmured, after a moment of mourning silence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2365">&#34;&#39;Intimacy grows quick out there,&#39; I said. </span>
      <span id="f2366">&#39;I knew him as well as it is possible for one man to know another.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2367">&#34;&#39;And you admired him,&#39; she said. </span>
      <span id="f2368">&#39;It was impossible to know him and not to admire him. </span>
      <span id="f2369">Was it?&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2370">&#34;&#39;He was a remarkable man,&#39; I said, unsteadily. </span>
      <span id="f2371">Then before the appealing fixity of her gaze, that seemed to watch for more words on my lips, I went on, &#39;It was impossible not to--&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2372">&#34;&#39;Love him,&#39; she finished eagerly, silencing me into an appalled dumbness. </span>
      <span id="f2373">&#39;How true! </span>
      <span id="f2374">how true! </span>
      <span id="f2375">But when you think that no one knew him so well as I! </span>
      <span id="f2376">I had all his noble confidence. </span>
      <span id="f2377">I knew him best.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2378">&#34;&#39;You knew him best,&#39; I repeated. </span>
      <span id="f2379">And perhaps she did. </span>
      <span id="f2380">But with every word spoken the room was growing darker, and only her forehead, smooth and white, remained illumined by the unextinguishable light of belief and love.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2381">&#34;&#39;You were his friend,&#39; she went on. </span>
      <span id="f2382">&#39;His friend,&#39; she repeated, a little louder. </span>
      <span id="f2383">&#39;You must have been, if he had given you this, and sent you to me. </span>
      <span id="f2384">I feel I can speak to you--and oh! </span>
      <span id="f2385">I must speak. </span>
      <span id="f2386">I want you--you who have heard his last words--to know I have been worthy of him. </span>
      <span id="f2387">. </span>
      <span id="f2388">. </span>
      <span id="f2389">. </span>
      <span id="f2390">It is not pride. </span>
      <span id="f2391">. </span>
      <span id="f2392">. </span>
      <span id="f2393">. </span>
      <span id="f2394">Yes! </span>
      <span id="f2395">I am proud to know I understood him better than anyone on earth--he told me so himself. </span>
      <span id="f2396">And since his mother died I have had no one--no one--to--to--&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2397">&#34;I listened. </span>
      <span id="f2398">The darkness deepened. </span>
      <span id="f2399">I was not even sure whether he had given me the right bundle. </span>
      <span id="f2400">I rather suspect he wanted me to take care of another batch of his papers which, after his death, I saw the manager examining under the lamp. </span>
      <span id="f2401">And the girl talked, easing her pain in the certitude of my sympathy; she talked as thirsty men drink. </span>
      <span id="f2402">I had heard that her engagement with Kurtz had been disapproved by her people. </span>
      <span id="f2403">He wasn&#39;t rich enough or something. </span>
      <span id="f2404">And indeed I don&#39;t know whether he had not been a pauper all his life. </span>
      <span id="f2405">He had given me some reason to infer that it was his impatience of comparative poverty that drove him out there.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2406">&#34;&#39;. </span>
      <span id="f2407">. </span>
      <span id="f2408">. </span>
      <span id="f2409">Who was not his friend who had heard him speak once?&#39; she was saying. </span>
      <span id="f2410">&#39;He drew men towards him by what was best in them.&#39; She looked at me with intensity. </span>
      <span id="f2411">&#39;It is the gift of the great,&#39; she went on, and the sound of her low voice seemed to have the accompaniment of all the other sounds, full of mystery, desolation, and sorrow, I had ever heard--the ripple of the river, the soughing of the trees swayed by the wind, the murmurs of wild crowds, the faint ring of incomprehensible words cried from afar, the whisper of a voice speaking from beyond the threshold of an eternal darkness. </span>
      <span id="f2412">&#39;But you have heard him! </span>
      <span id="f2413">You know!&#39; she cried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2414">&#34;&#39;Yes, I know,&#39; I said with something like despair in my heart, but bowing my head before the faith that was in her, before that great and saving illusion that shone with an unearthly glow in the darkness, in the triumphant darkness from which I could not have defended her--from which I could not even defend myself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2415">&#34;&#39;What a loss to me--to us!&#39;--she corrected herself with beautiful generosity; then added in a murmur, &#39;To the world.&#39; By the last gleams of twilight I could see the glitter of her eyes, full of tears--of tears that would not fall.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2416">&#34;&#39;I have been very happy--very fortunate--very proud,&#39; she went on. </span>
      <span id="f2417">&#39;Too fortunate. </span>
      <span id="f2418">Too happy for a little while. </span>
      <span id="f2419">And now I am unhappy for--for life.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2420">&#34;She stood up; her fair hair seemed to catch all the remaining light in a glimmer of gold. </span>
      <span id="f2421">I rose too.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2422">&#34;&#39;And of all this,&#39; she went on, mournfully, &#39;of all his promise, and of all his greatness, of his generous mind, of his noble heart, nothing remains--nothing but a memory. </span>
      <span id="f2423">You and I--&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2424">&#34;&#39;We shall always remember him,&#39; I said, hastily.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2425">&#34;&#39;No!&#39; she cried. </span>
      <span id="f2426">&#39;It is impossible that all this should be lost--that such a life should be sacrificed to leave nothing--but sorrow. </span>
      <span id="f2427">You know what vast plans he had. </span>
      <span id="f2428">I knew of them too--I could not perhaps understand,--but others knew of them. </span>
      <span id="f2429">Something must remain. </span>
      <span id="f2430">His words, at least, have not died.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2431">&#34;&#39;His words will remain,&#39; I said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2432">&#34;&#39;And his example,&#39; she whispered to herself. </span>
      <span id="f2433">&#39;Men looked up to him,--his goodness shone in every act. </span>
      <span id="f2434">His example--&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2435">&#34;&#39;True,&#39; I said; &#39;his example too. </span>
      <span id="f2436">Yes, his example. </span>
      <span id="f2437">I forgot that.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2438">&#34;&#39;But I do not. </span>
      <span id="f2439">I cannot--I cannot believe--not yet. </span>
      <span id="f2440">I cannot believe that I shall never see him again, that nobody will see him again, never, never, never.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2441">&#34;She put out her arms as if after a retreating figure, stretching them black and with clasped pale hands across the fading and narrow sheen of the window. </span>
      <span id="f2442">Never see him! </span>
      <span id="f2443">I saw him clearly enough then. </span>
      <span id="f2444">I shall see this eloquent phantom as long as I live, and I shall see her too, a tragic and familiar Shade, resembling in this gesture another one, tragic also, and bedecked with powerless charms, stretching bare brown arms over the glitter of the infernal stream, the stream of darkness. </span>
      <span id="f2445">She said suddenly very low, &#39;He died as he lived.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2446">&#34;&#39;His end,&#39; said I, with dull anger stirring in me, &#39;was in every way worthy of his life.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2447">&#34;&#39;And I was not with him,&#39; she murmured. </span>
      <span id="f2448">My anger subsided before a feeling of infinite pity.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2449">&#34;&#39;Everything that could be done--&#39; I mumbled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2450">&#34;&#39;Ah, but I believed in him more than anyone on earth--more than his own mother, more than--himself. </span>
      <span id="f2451">He needed me! </span>
      <span id="f2452">Me! </span>
      <span id="f2453">I would have treasured every sigh, every word, every sign, every glance.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2454">&#34;I felt like a chill grip on my chest. </span>
      <span id="f2455">&#39;Don&#39;t,&#39; I said, in a muffled voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2456">&#34;&#39;Forgive me. </span>
      <span id="f2457">I--I--have mourned so long in silence--in silence. </span>
      <span id="f2458">. </span>
      <span id="f2459">. </span>
      <span id="f2460">. </span>
      <span id="f2461">You were with him--to the last? </span>
      <span id="f2462">I think of his loneliness. </span>
      <span id="f2463">Nobody near to understand him as I would have understood. </span>
      <span id="f2464">Perhaps no one to hear. </span>
      <span id="f2465">. </span>
      <span id="f2466">. </span>
      <span id="f2467">.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2468">&#34;&#39;To the very end,&#39; I said, shakily. </span>
      <span id="f2469">&#39;I heard his very last words. </span>
      <span id="f2470">. </span>
      <span id="f2471">. </span>
      <span id="f2472">.&#39; I stopped in a fright.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2473">&#34;&#39;Repeat them,&#39; she said in a heart-broken tone. </span>
      <span id="f2474">&#39;I want--I want--something--something--to--to live with.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2475">&#34;I was on the point of crying at her, &#39;Don&#39;t you hear them?&#39; The dusk was repeating them in a persistent whisper all around us, in a whisper that seemed to swell menacingly like the first whisper of a rising wind. </span>
      <span id="f2476">&#39;The horror! </span>
      <span id="f2477">The horror!&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2478">&#34;&#39;His last word--to live with,&#39; she murmured. </span>
      <span id="f2479">&#39;Don&#39;t you understand I loved him--I loved him--I loved him!&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2480">&#34;I pulled myself together and spoke slowly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2481">&#34;&#39;The last word he pronounced was--your name.&#39;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2482">&#34;I heard a light sigh, and then my heart stood still, stopped dead short by an exulting and terrible cry, by the cry of inconceivable triumph and of unspeakable pain. </span>
      <span id="f2483">&#39;I knew it--I was sure!&#39; . </span>
      <span id="f2484">. </span>
      <span id="f2485">. </span>
      <span id="f2486">She knew. </span>
      <span id="f2487">She was sure. </span>
      <span id="f2488">I heard her weeping; she had hidden her face in her hands. </span>
      <span id="f2489">It seemed to me that the house would collapse before I could escape, that the heavens would fall upon my head. </span>
      <span id="f2490">But nothing happened. </span>
      <span id="f2491">The heavens do not fall for such a trifle. </span>
      <span id="f2492">Would they have fallen, I wonder, if I had rendered Kurtz that justice which was his due? </span>
      <span id="f2493">Hadn&#39;t he said he wanted only justice? </span>
      <span id="f2494">But I couldn&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f2495">I could not tell her. </span>
      <span id="f2496">It would have been too dark--too dark altogether. </span>
      <span id="f2497">. </span>
      <span id="f2498">. </span>
      <span id="f2499">.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2500">Marlow ceased, and sat apart, indistinct and silent, in the pose of a meditating Buddha. </span>
      <span id="f2501">Nobody moved for a time. </span>
      <span id="f2502">&#34;We have lost the first of the ebb,&#34; said the Director, suddenly. </span>
      <span id="f2503">I raised my head. </span>
      <span id="f2504">The offing was barred by a black bank of clouds, and the tranquil waterway leading to the uttermost ends of the earth flowed somber under an overcast sky--seemed to lead into the heart of an immense darkness.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>