<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>THE PREFACE</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0003">THE PREFACE</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0004">The artist is the creator of beautiful things. </span>
      <span id="f0005"> To reveal art and conceal the artist is art&#39;s aim. </span>
      <span id="f0006"> The critic is he who can translate into another manner or a new material his impression of beautiful things.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0007">The highest as the lowest form of criticism is a mode of autobiography. </span>
      <span id="f0008">Those who find ugly meanings in beautiful things are corrupt without being charming. </span>
      <span id="f0009"> This is a fault.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0010">Those who find beautiful meanings in beautiful things are the cultivated. </span>
      <span id="f0011"> For these there is hope. </span>
      <span id="f0012"> They are the elect to whom beautiful things mean only beauty.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0013">There is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book. </span>
      <span id="f0014"> Books are well written, or badly written. </span>
      <span id="f0015"> That is all.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0016">The nineteenth century dislike of realism is the rage of Caliban seeing his own face in a glass.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0017">The nineteenth century dislike of romanticism is the rage of Caliban not seeing his own face in a glass. </span>
      <span id="f0018"> The moral life of man forms part of the subject-matter of the artist, but the morality of art consists in the perfect use of an imperfect medium. </span>
      <span id="f0019"> No artist desires to prove anything. </span>
      <span id="f0020"> Even things that are true can be proved. </span>
      <span id="f0021"> No artist has ethical sympathies. </span>
      <span id="f0022"> An ethical sympathy in an artist is an unpardonable mannerism of style. </span>
      <span id="f0023"> No artist is ever morbid. </span>
      <span id="f0024"> The artist can express everything. </span>
      <span id="f0025"> Thought and language are to the artist instruments of an art. </span>
      <span id="f0026"> Vice and virtue are to the artist materials for an art. </span>
      <span id="f0027"> From the point of view of form, the type of all the arts is the art of the musician. </span>
      <span id="f0028"> From the point of view of feeling, the actor&#39;s craft is the type. </span>
      <span id="f0029"> All art is at once surface and symbol. </span>
      <span id="f0030">Those who go beneath the surface do so at their peril. </span>
      <span id="f0031"> Those who read the symbol do so at their peril. </span>
      <span id="f0032"> It is the spectator, and not life, that art really mirrors. </span>
      <span id="f0033"> Diversity of opinion about a work of art shows that the work is new, complex, and vital. </span>
      <span id="f0034"> When critics disagree, the artist is in accord with himself. </span>
      <span id="f0035"> We can forgive a man for making a useful thing as long as he does not admire it. </span>
      <span id="f0036"> The only excuse for making a useless thing is that one admires it intensely.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0037">All art is quite useless.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0038">OSCAR WILDE</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>