<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER 1</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0039">CHAPTER 1</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0040">The studio was filled with the rich odour of roses, and when the light summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden, there came through the open door the heavy scent of the lilac, or the more delicate perfume of the pink-flowering thorn.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0041">From the corner of the divan of Persian saddle-bags on which he was lying, smoking, as was his custom, innumerable cigarettes, Lord Henry Wotton could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and honey-coloured blossoms of a laburnum, whose tremulous branches seemed hardly able to bear the burden of a beauty so flamelike as theirs; and now and then the fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted across the long tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front of the huge window, producing a kind of momentary Japanese effect, and making him think of those pallid, jade-faced painters of Tokyo who, through the medium of an art that is necessarily immobile, seek to convey the sense of swiftness and motion. </span>
      <span id="f0042"> The sullen murmur of the bees shouldering their way through the long unmown grass, or circling with monotonous insistence round the dusty gilt horns of the straggling woodbine, seemed to make the stillness more oppressive. </span>
      <span id="f0043"> The dim roar of London was like the bourdon note of a distant organ.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0044">In the centre of the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the full-length portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal beauty, and in front of it, some little distance away, was sitting the artist himself, Basil Hallward, whose sudden disappearance some years ago caused, at the time, such public excitement and gave rise to so many strange conjectures.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0045">As the painter looked at the gracious and comely form he had so skilfully mirrored in his art, a smile of pleasure passed across his face, and seemed about to linger there. </span>
      <span id="f0046"> But he suddenly started up, and closing his eyes, placed his fingers upon the lids, as though he sought to imprison within his brain some curious dream from which he feared he might awake.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0047">&#34;It is your best work, Basil, the best thing you have ever done,&#34; said Lord Henry languidly. </span>
      <span id="f0048"> &#34;You must certainly send it next year to the Grosvenor. </span>
      <span id="f0049"> The Academy is too large and too vulgar. </span>
      <span id="f0050"> Whenever I have gone there, there have been either so many people that I have not been able to see the pictures, which was dreadful, or so many pictures that I have not been able to see the people, which was worse. </span>
      <span id="f0051"> The Grosvenor is really the only place.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0052">&#34;I don&#39;t think I shall send it anywhere,&#34; he answered, tossing his head back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at him at Oxford. </span>
      <span id="f0053"> &#34;No, I won&#39;t send it anywhere.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0054">Lord Henry elevated his eyebrows and looked at him in amazement through the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful whorls from his heavy, opium-tainted cigarette. </span>
      <span id="f0055"> &#34;Not send it anywhere? </span>
      <span id="f0056"> My dear fellow, why? </span>
      <span id="f0057"> Have you any reason? </span>
      <span id="f0058"> What odd chaps you painters are! </span>
      <span id="f0059"> You do anything in the world to gain a reputation. </span>
      <span id="f0060"> As soon as you have one, you seem to want to throw it away. </span>
      <span id="f0061"> It is silly of you, for there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about, and that is not being talked about. </span>
      <span id="f0062"> A portrait like this would set you far above all the young men in England, and make the old men quite jealous, if old men are ever capable of any emotion.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0063">&#34;I know you will laugh at me,&#34; he replied, &#34;but I really can&#39;t exhibit it. </span>
      <span id="f0064"> I have put too much of myself into it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0065">Lord Henry stretched himself out on the divan and laughed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0066">&#34;Yes, I knew you would; but it is quite true, all the same.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0067">&#34;Too much of yourself in it! </span>
      <span id="f0068">Upon my word, Basil, I didn&#39;t know you were so vain; and I really can&#39;t see any resemblance between you, with your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and this young Adonis, who looks as if he was made out of ivory and rose-leaves. </span>
      <span id="f0069">Why, my dear Basil, he is a Narcissus, and you--well, of course you have an intellectual expression and all that. </span>
      <span id="f0070"> But beauty, real beauty, ends where an intellectual expression begins. </span>
      <span id="f0071"> Intellect is in itself a mode of exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any face. </span>
      <span id="f0072"> The moment one sits down to think, one becomes all nose, or all forehead, or something horrid. </span>
      <span id="f0073"> Look at the successful men in any of the learned professions. </span>
      <span id="f0074">How perfectly hideous they are! </span>
      <span id="f0075"> Except, of course, in the Church. </span>
      <span id="f0076"> But then in the Church they don&#39;t think. </span>
      <span id="f0077"> A bishop keeps on saying at the age of eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen, and as a natural consequence he always looks absolutely delightful. </span>
      <span id="f0078">Your mysterious young friend, whose name you have never told me, but whose picture really fascinates me, never thinks. </span>
      <span id="f0079"> I feel quite sure of that. </span>
      <span id="f0080"> He is some brainless beautiful creature who should be always here in winter when we have no flowers to look at, and always here in summer when we want something to chill our intelligence. </span>
      <span id="f0081"> Don&#39;t flatter yourself, Basil:  you are not in the least like him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0082">&#34;You don&#39;t understand me, Harry,&#34; answered the artist. </span>
      <span id="f0083"> &#34;Of course I am not like him. </span>
      <span id="f0084"> I know that perfectly well. </span>
      <span id="f0085"> Indeed, I should be sorry to look like him. </span>
      <span id="f0086"> You shrug your shoulders? </span>
      <span id="f0087"> I am telling you the truth. </span>
      <span id="f0088"> There is a fatality about all physical and intellectual distinction, the sort of fatality that seems to dog through history the faltering steps of kings. </span>
      <span id="f0089"> It is better not to be different from one&#39;s fellows. </span>
      <span id="f0090"> The ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world. </span>
      <span id="f0091">They can sit at their ease and gape at the play. </span>
      <span id="f0092"> If they know nothing of victory, they are at least spared the knowledge of defeat. </span>
      <span id="f0093"> They live as we all should live--undisturbed, indifferent, and without disquiet. </span>
      <span id="f0094"> They neither bring ruin upon others, nor ever receive it from alien hands. </span>
      <span id="f0095"> Your rank and wealth, Harry; my brains, such as they are--my art, whatever it may be worth; Dorian Gray&#39;s good looks--we shall all suffer for what the gods have given us, suffer terribly.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0096">&#34;Dorian Gray? </span>
      <span id="f0097"> Is that his name?&#34; asked Lord Henry, walking across the studio towards Basil Hallward.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0098">&#34;Yes, that is his name. </span>
      <span id="f0099"> I didn&#39;t intend to tell it to you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0100">&#34;But why not?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0101">&#34;Oh, I can&#39;t explain. </span>
      <span id="f0102"> When I like people immensely, I never tell their names to any one. </span>
      <span id="f0103"> It is like surrendering a part of them. </span>
      <span id="f0104"> I have grown to love secrecy. </span>
      <span id="f0105"> It seems to be the one thing that can make modern life mysterious or marvellous to us. </span>
      <span id="f0106"> The commonest thing is delightful if one only hides it. </span>
      <span id="f0107"> When I leave town now I never tell my people where I am going. </span>
      <span id="f0108"> If I did, I would lose all my pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f0109"> It is a silly habit, I dare say, but somehow it seems to bring a great deal of romance into one&#39;s life. </span>
      <span id="f0110"> I suppose you think me awfully foolish about it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0111">&#34;Not at all,&#34; answered Lord Henry, &#34;not at all, my dear Basil. </span>
      <span id="f0112"> You seem to forget that I am married, and the one charm of marriage is that it makes a life of deception absolutely necessary for both parties. </span>
      <span id="f0113"> I never know where my wife is, and my wife never knows what I am doing. </span>
      <span id="f0114">When we meet--we do meet occasionally, when we dine out together, or go down to the Duke&#39;s--we tell each other the most absurd stories with the most serious faces. </span>
      <span id="f0115"> My wife is very good at it--much better, in fact, than I am. </span>
      <span id="f0116"> She never gets confused over her dates, and I always do. </span>
      <span id="f0117">But when she does find me out, she makes no row at all. </span>
      <span id="f0118"> I sometimes wish she would; but she merely laughs at me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0119">&#34;I hate the way you talk about your married life, Harry,&#34; said Basil Hallward, strolling towards the door that led into the garden. </span>
      <span id="f0120"> &#34;I believe that you are really a very good husband, but that you are thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues. </span>
      <span id="f0121"> You are an extraordinary fellow. </span>
      <span id="f0122"> You never say a moral thing, and you never do a wrong thing. </span>
      <span id="f0123">Your cynicism is simply a pose.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0124">&#34;Being natural is simply a pose, and the most irritating pose I know,&#34; cried Lord Henry, laughing; and the two young men went out into the garden together and ensconced themselves on a long bamboo seat that stood in the shade of a tall laurel bush. </span>
      <span id="f0125"> The sunlight slipped over the polished leaves. </span>
      <span id="f0126"> In the grass, white daisies were tremulous.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0127">After a pause, Lord Henry pulled out his watch. </span>
      <span id="f0128"> &#34;I am afraid I must be going, Basil,&#34; he murmured, &#34;and before I go, I insist on your answering a question I put to you some time ago.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0129">&#34;What is that?&#34; said the painter, keeping his eyes fixed on the ground.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0130">&#34;You know quite well.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0131">&#34;I do not, Harry.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0132">&#34;Well, I will tell you what it is. </span>
      <span id="f0133"> I want you to explain to me why you won&#39;t exhibit Dorian Gray&#39;s picture. </span>
      <span id="f0134"> I want the real reason.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0135">&#34;I told you the real reason.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0136">&#34;No, you did not. </span>
      <span id="f0137"> You said it was because there was too much of yourself in it. </span>
      <span id="f0138"> Now, that is childish.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0139">&#34;Harry,&#34; said Basil Hallward, looking him straight in the face, &#34;every portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not of the sitter. </span>
      <span id="f0140"> The sitter is merely the accident, the occasion. </span>
      <span id="f0141"> It is not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, on the coloured canvas, reveals himself. </span>
      <span id="f0142"> The reason I will not exhibit this picture is that I am afraid that I have shown in it the secret of my own soul.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0143">Lord Henry laughed. </span>
      <span id="f0144"> &#34;And what is that?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0145">&#34;I will tell you,&#34; said Hallward; but an expression of perplexity came over his face.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0146">&#34;I am all expectation, Basil,&#34; continued his companion, glancing at him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0147">&#34;Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry,&#34; answered the painter; &#34;and I am afraid you will hardly understand it. </span>
      <span id="f0148"> Perhaps you will hardly believe it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0149">Lord Henry smiled, and leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled daisy from the grass and examined it. </span>
      <span id="f0150"> &#34;I am quite sure I shall understand it,&#34; he replied, gazing intently at the little golden, white-feathered disk, &#34;and as for believing things, I can believe anything, provided that it is quite incredible.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0151">The wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy lilac-blooms, with their clustering stars, moved to and fro in the languid air. </span>
      <span id="f0152"> A grasshopper began to chirrup by the wall, and like a blue thread a long thin dragon-fly floated past on its brown gauze wings. </span>
      <span id="f0153"> Lord Henry felt as if he could hear Basil Hallward&#39;s heart beating, and wondered what was coming.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0154">&#34;The story is simply this,&#34; said the painter after some time. </span>
      <span id="f0155"> &#34;Two months ago I went to a crush at Lady Brandon&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f0156">You know we poor artists have to show ourselves in society from time to time, just to remind the public that we are not savages. </span>
      <span id="f0157"> With an evening coat and a white tie, as you told me once, anybody, even a stock-broker, can gain a reputation for being civilized. </span>
      <span id="f0158"> Well, after I had been in the room about ten minutes, talking to huge overdressed dowagers and tedious academicians, I suddenly became conscious that some one was looking at me. </span>
      <span id="f0159"> I turned half-way round and saw Dorian Gray for the first time. </span>
      <span id="f0160">When our eyes met, I felt that I was growing pale. </span>
      <span id="f0161"> A curious sensation of terror came over me. </span>
      <span id="f0162"> I knew that I had come face to face with some one whose mere personality was so fascinating that, if I allowed it to do so, it would absorb my whole nature, my whole soul, my very art itself. </span>
      <span id="f0163"> I did not want any external influence in my life. </span>
      <span id="f0164"> You know yourself, Harry, how independent I am by nature. </span>
      <span id="f0165"> I have always been my own master; had at least always been so, till I met Dorian Gray. </span>
      <span id="f0166">Then--but I don&#39;t know how to explain it to you. </span>
      <span id="f0167"> Something seemed to tell me that I was on the verge of a terrible crisis in my life. </span>
      <span id="f0168"> I had a strange feeling that fate had in store for me exquisite joys and exquisite sorrows. </span>
      <span id="f0169"> I grew afraid and turned to quit the room. </span>
      <span id="f0170"> It was not conscience that made me do so:  it was a sort of cowardice. </span>
      <span id="f0171"> I take no credit to myself for trying to escape.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0172">&#34;Conscience and cowardice are really the same things, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f0173">Conscience is the trade-name of the firm. </span>
      <span id="f0174"> That is all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0175">&#34;I don&#39;t believe that, Harry, and I don&#39;t believe you do either. </span>
      <span id="f0176">However, whatever was my motive--and it may have been pride, for I used to be very proud--I certainly struggled to the door. </span>
      <span id="f0177"> There, of course, I stumbled against Lady Brandon. </span>
      <span id="f0178"> &#39;You are not going to run away so soon, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0179">Hallward?&#39; she screamed out. </span>
      <span id="f0180"> You know her curiously shrill voice?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0181">&#34;Yes; she is a peacock in everything but beauty,&#34; said Lord Henry, pulling the daisy to bits with his long nervous fingers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0182">&#34;I could not get rid of her. </span>
      <span id="f0183"> She brought me up to royalties, and people with stars and garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic tiaras and parrot noses. </span>
      <span id="f0184"> She spoke of me as her dearest friend. </span>
      <span id="f0185"> I had only met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize me. </span>
      <span id="f0186"> I believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the time, at least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers, which is the nineteenth-century standard of immortality. </span>
      <span id="f0187"> Suddenly I found myself face to face with the young man whose personality had so strangely stirred me. </span>
      <span id="f0188"> We were quite close, almost touching. </span>
      <span id="f0189"> Our eyes met again. </span>
      <span id="f0190">It was reckless of me, but I asked Lady Brandon to introduce me to him. </span>
      <span id="f0191">Perhaps it was not so reckless, after all. </span>
      <span id="f0192"> It was simply inevitable. </span>
      <span id="f0193">We would have spoken to each other without any introduction. </span>
      <span id="f0194"> I am sure of that. </span>
      <span id="f0195"> Dorian told me so afterwards. </span>
      <span id="f0196"> He, too, felt that we were destined to know each other.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0197">&#34;And how did Lady Brandon describe this wonderful young man?&#34; asked his companion. </span>
      <span id="f0198"> &#34;I know she goes in for giving a rapid _precis_ of all her guests. </span>
      <span id="f0199"> I remember her bringing me up to a truculent and red-faced old gentleman covered all over with orders and ribbons, and hissing into my ear, in a tragic whisper which must have been perfectly audible to everybody in the room, the most astounding details. </span>
      <span id="f0200"> I simply fled. </span>
      <span id="f0201"> I like to find out people for myself. </span>
      <span id="f0202"> But Lady Brandon treats her guests exactly as an auctioneer treats his goods. </span>
      <span id="f0203"> She either explains them entirely away, or tells one everything about them except what one wants to know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0204">&#34;Poor Lady Brandon! </span>
      <span id="f0205"> You are hard on her, Harry!&#34; said Hallward listlessly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0206">&#34;My dear fellow, she tried to found a _salon_, and only succeeded in opening a restaurant. </span>
      <span id="f0207"> How could I admire her? </span>
      <span id="f0208"> But tell me, what did she say about Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0209">Dorian Gray?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0210">&#34;Oh, something like, &#39;Charming boy--poor dear mother and I absolutely inseparable. </span>
      <span id="f0211"> Quite forget what he does--afraid he--doesn&#39;t do anything--oh, yes, plays the piano--or is it the violin, dear Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0212">Gray?&#39;  Neither of us could help laughing, and we became friends at once.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0213">&#34;Laughter is not at all a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is far the best ending for one,&#34; said the young lord, plucking another daisy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0214">Hallward shook his head. </span>
      <span id="f0215"> &#34;You don&#39;t understand what friendship is, Harry,&#34; he murmured--&#34;or what enmity is, for that matter. </span>
      <span id="f0216"> You like every one; that is to say, you are indifferent to every one.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0217">&#34;How horribly unjust of you!&#34; cried Lord Henry, tilting his hat back and looking up at the little clouds that, like ravelled skeins of glossy white silk, were drifting across the hollowed turquoise of the summer sky. </span>
      <span id="f0218"> &#34;Yes; horribly unjust of you. </span>
      <span id="f0219"> I make a great difference between people. </span>
      <span id="f0220"> I choose my friends for their good looks, my acquaintances for their good characters, and my enemies for their good intellects. </span>
      <span id="f0221"> A man cannot be too careful in the choice of his enemies. </span>
      <span id="f0222">I have not got one who is a fool. </span>
      <span id="f0223"> They are all men of some intellectual power, and consequently they all appreciate me. </span>
      <span id="f0224"> Is that very vain of me? </span>
      <span id="f0225"> I think it is rather vain.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0226">&#34;I should think it was, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f0227"> But according to your category I must be merely an acquaintance.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0228">&#34;My dear old Basil, you are much more than an acquaintance.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0229">&#34;And much less than a friend. </span>
      <span id="f0230"> A sort of brother, I suppose?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0231">&#34;Oh, brothers! </span>
      <span id="f0232"> I don&#39;t care for brothers. </span>
      <span id="f0233"> My elder brother won&#39;t die, and my younger brothers seem never to do anything else.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0234">&#34;Harry!&#34; exclaimed Hallward, frowning.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0235">&#34;My dear fellow, I am not quite serious. </span>
      <span id="f0236"> But I can&#39;t help detesting my relations. </span>
      <span id="f0237"> I suppose it comes from the fact that none of us can stand other people having the same faults as ourselves. </span>
      <span id="f0238"> I quite sympathize with the rage of the English democracy against what they call the vices of the upper orders. </span>
      <span id="f0239"> The masses feel that drunkenness, stupidity, and immorality should be their own special property, and that if any one of us makes an ass of himself, he is poaching on their preserves. </span>
      <span id="f0240"> When poor Southwark got into the divorce court, their indignation was quite magnificent. </span>
      <span id="f0241"> And yet I don&#39;t suppose that ten per cent of the proletariat live correctly.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0242">&#34;I don&#39;t agree with a single word that you have said, and, what is more, Harry, I feel sure you don&#39;t either.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0243">Lord Henry stroked his pointed brown beard and tapped the toe of his patent-leather boot with a tasselled ebony cane. </span>
      <span id="f0244"> &#34;How English you are Basil! </span>
      <span id="f0245"> That is the second time you have made that observation. </span>
      <span id="f0246"> If one puts forward an idea to a true Englishman--always a rash thing to do--he never dreams of considering whether the idea is right or wrong. </span>
      <span id="f0247">The only thing he considers of any importance is whether one believes it oneself. </span>
      <span id="f0248"> Now, the value of an idea has nothing whatsoever to do with the sincerity of the man who expresses it. </span>
      <span id="f0249"> Indeed, the probabilities are that the more insincere the man is, the more purely intellectual will the idea be, as in that case it will not be coloured by either his wants, his desires, or his prejudices. </span>
      <span id="f0250"> However, I don&#39;t propose to discuss politics, sociology, or metaphysics with you. </span>
      <span id="f0251"> I like persons better than principles, and I like persons with no principles better than anything else in the world. </span>
      <span id="f0252"> Tell me more about Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0253">Dorian Gray. </span>
      <span id="f0254"> How often do you see him?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0255">&#34;Every day. </span>
      <span id="f0256"> I couldn&#39;t be happy if I didn&#39;t see him every day. </span>
      <span id="f0257"> He is absolutely necessary to me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0258">&#34;How extraordinary! </span>
      <span id="f0259"> I thought you would never care for anything but your art.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0260">&#34;He is all my art to me now,&#34; said the painter gravely. </span>
      <span id="f0261"> &#34;I sometimes think, Harry, that there are only two eras of any importance in the world&#39;s history. </span>
      <span id="f0262"> The first is the appearance of a new medium for art, and the second is the appearance of a new personality for art also. </span>
      <span id="f0263">What the invention of oil-painting was to the Venetians, the face of Antinous was to late Greek sculpture, and the face of Dorian Gray will some day be to me. </span>
      <span id="f0264"> It is not merely that I paint from him, draw from him, sketch from him. </span>
      <span id="f0265"> Of course, I have done all that. </span>
      <span id="f0266"> But he is much more to me than a model or a sitter. </span>
      <span id="f0267"> I won&#39;t tell you that I am dissatisfied with what I have done of him, or that his beauty is such that art cannot express it. </span>
      <span id="f0268"> There is nothing that art cannot express, and I know that the work I have done, since I met Dorian Gray, is good work, is the best work of my life. </span>
      <span id="f0269"> But in some curious way--I wonder will you understand me?--his personality has suggested to me an entirely new manner in art, an entirely new mode of style. </span>
      <span id="f0270"> I see things differently, I think of them differently. </span>
      <span id="f0271"> I can now recreate life in a way that was hidden from me before. </span>
      <span id="f0272"> &#39;A dream of form in days of thought&#39;--who is it who says that? </span>
      <span id="f0273"> I forget; but it is what Dorian Gray has been to me. </span>
      <span id="f0274"> The merely visible presence of this lad--for he seems to me little more than a lad, though he is really over twenty--his merely visible presence--ah! </span>
      <span id="f0275"> I wonder can you realize all that that means? </span>
      <span id="f0276"> Unconsciously he defines for me the lines of a fresh school, a school that is to have in it all the passion of the romantic spirit, all the perfection of the spirit that is Greek. </span>
      <span id="f0277"> The harmony of soul and body--how much that is! </span>
      <span id="f0278"> We in our madness have separated the two, and have invented a realism that is vulgar, an ideality that is void. </span>
      <span id="f0279"> Harry! </span>
      <span id="f0280">if you only knew what Dorian Gray is to me! </span>
      <span id="f0281"> You remember that landscape of mine, for which Agnew offered me such a huge price but which I would not part with? </span>
      <span id="f0282"> It is one of the best things I have ever done. </span>
      <span id="f0283"> And why is it so? </span>
      <span id="f0284"> Because, while I was painting it, Dorian Gray sat beside me. </span>
      <span id="f0285"> Some subtle influence passed from him to me, and for the first time in my life I saw in the plain woodland the wonder I had always looked for and always missed.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0286">&#34;Basil, this is extraordinary! </span>
      <span id="f0287"> I must see Dorian Gray.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0288">Hallward got up from the seat and walked up and down the garden. </span>
      <span id="f0289"> After some time he came back. </span>
      <span id="f0290"> &#34;Harry,&#34; he said, &#34;Dorian Gray is to me simply a motive in art. </span>
      <span id="f0291"> You might see nothing in him. </span>
      <span id="f0292"> I see everything in him. </span>
      <span id="f0293"> He is never more present in my work than when no image of him is there. </span>
      <span id="f0294"> He is a suggestion, as I have said, of a new manner. </span>
      <span id="f0295"> I find him in the curves of certain lines, in the loveliness and subtleties of certain colours. </span>
      <span id="f0296"> That is all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0297">&#34;Then why won&#39;t you exhibit his portrait?&#34; asked Lord Henry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0298">&#34;Because, without intending it, I have put into it some expression of all this curious artistic idolatry, of which, of course, I have never cared to speak to him. </span>
      <span id="f0299"> He knows nothing about it. </span>
      <span id="f0300"> He shall never know anything about it. </span>
      <span id="f0301"> But the world might guess it, and I will not bare my soul to their shallow prying eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0302"> My heart shall never be put under their microscope. </span>
      <span id="f0303"> There is too much of myself in the thing, Harry--too much of myself!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0304">&#34;Poets are not so scrupulous as you are. </span>
      <span id="f0305"> They know how useful passion is for publication. </span>
      <span id="f0306"> Nowadays a broken heart will run to many editions.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0307">&#34;I hate them for it,&#34; cried Hallward. </span>
      <span id="f0308"> &#34;An artist should create beautiful things, but should put nothing of his own life into them. </span>
      <span id="f0309"> We live in an age when men treat art as if it were meant to be a form of autobiography. </span>
      <span id="f0310"> We have lost the abstract sense of beauty. </span>
      <span id="f0311"> Some day I will show the world what it is; and for that reason the world shall never see my portrait of Dorian Gray.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0312">&#34;I think you are wrong, Basil, but I won&#39;t argue with you. </span>
      <span id="f0313"> It is only the intellectually lost who ever argue. </span>
      <span id="f0314"> Tell me, is Dorian Gray very fond of you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0315">The painter considered for a few moments. </span>
      <span id="f0316"> &#34;He likes me,&#34; he answered after a pause; &#34;I know he likes me. </span>
      <span id="f0317"> Of course I flatter him dreadfully. </span>
      <span id="f0318"> I find a strange pleasure in saying things to him that I know I shall be sorry for having said. </span>
      <span id="f0319"> As a rule, he is charming to me, and we sit in the studio and talk of a thousand things. </span>
      <span id="f0320"> Now and then, however, he is horribly thoughtless, and seems to take a real delight in giving me pain. </span>
      <span id="f0321"> Then I feel, Harry, that I have given away my whole soul to some one who treats it as if it were a flower to put in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for a summer&#39;s day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0322">&#34;Days in summer, Basil, are apt to linger,&#34; murmured Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f0323">&#34;Perhaps you will tire sooner than he will. </span>
      <span id="f0324"> It is a sad thing to think of, but there is no doubt that genius lasts longer than beauty. </span>
      <span id="f0325"> That accounts for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educate ourselves. </span>
      <span id="f0326"> In the wild struggle for existence, we want to have something that endures, and so we fill our minds with rubbish and facts, in the silly hope of keeping our place. </span>
      <span id="f0327"> The thoroughly well-informed man--that is the modern ideal. </span>
      <span id="f0328"> And the mind of the thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing. </span>
      <span id="f0329"> It is like a _bric-a-brac_ shop, all monsters and dust, with everything priced above its proper value. </span>
      <span id="f0330"> I think you will tire first, all the same. </span>
      <span id="f0331"> Some day you will look at your friend, and he will seem to you to be a little out of drawing, or you won&#39;t like his tone of colour, or something. </span>
      <span id="f0332">You will bitterly reproach him in your own heart, and seriously think that he has behaved very badly to you. </span>
      <span id="f0333"> The next time he calls, you will be perfectly cold and indifferent. </span>
      <span id="f0334"> It will be a great pity, for it will alter you. </span>
      <span id="f0335"> What you have told me is quite a romance, a romance of art one might call it, and the worst of having a romance of any kind is that it leaves one so unromantic.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0336">&#34;Harry, don&#39;t talk like that. </span>
      <span id="f0337"> As long as I live, the personality of Dorian Gray will dominate me. </span>
      <span id="f0338"> You can&#39;t feel what I feel. </span>
      <span id="f0339"> You change too often.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0340">&#34;Ah, my dear Basil, that is exactly why I can feel it. </span>
      <span id="f0341"> Those who are faithful know only the trivial side of love: it is the faithless who know love&#39;s tragedies.&#34;  And Lord Henry struck a light on a dainty silver case and began to smoke a cigarette with a self-conscious and satisfied air, as if he had summed up the world in a phrase. </span>
      <span id="f0342"> There was a rustle of chirruping sparrows in the green lacquer leaves of the ivy, and the blue cloud-shadows chased themselves across the grass like swallows. </span>
      <span id="f0343"> How pleasant it was in the garden! </span>
      <span id="f0344"> And how delightful other people&#39;s emotions were!--much more delightful than their ideas, it seemed to him. </span>
      <span id="f0345"> One&#39;s own soul, and the passions of one&#39;s friends--those were the fascinating things in life. </span>
      <span id="f0346"> He pictured to himself with silent amusement the tedious luncheon that he had missed by staying so long with Basil Hallward. </span>
      <span id="f0347"> Had he gone to his aunt&#39;s, he would have been sure to have met Lord Goodbody there, and the whole conversation would have been about the feeding of the poor and the necessity for model lodging-houses. </span>
      <span id="f0348">Each class would have preached the importance of those virtues, for whose exercise there was no necessity in their own lives. </span>
      <span id="f0349"> The rich would have spoken on the value of thrift, and the idle grown eloquent over the dignity of labour. </span>
      <span id="f0350"> It was charming to have escaped all that! </span>
      <span id="f0351"> As he thought of his aunt, an idea seemed to strike him. </span>
      <span id="f0352"> He turned to Hallward and said, &#34;My dear fellow, I have just remembered.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0353">&#34;Remembered what, Harry?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0354">&#34;Where I heard the name of Dorian Gray.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0355">&#34;Where was it?&#34; asked Hallward, with a slight frown.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0356">&#34;Don&#39;t look so angry, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f0357"> It was at my aunt, Lady Agatha&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f0358"> She told me she had discovered a wonderful young man who was going to help her in the East End, and that his name was Dorian Gray. </span>
      <span id="f0359"> I am bound to state that she never told me he was good-looking. </span>
      <span id="f0360">Women have no appreciation of good looks; at least, good women have not. </span>
      <span id="f0361"> She said that he was very earnest and had a beautiful nature. </span>
      <span id="f0362"> I at once pictured to myself a creature with spectacles and lank hair, horribly freckled, and tramping about on huge feet. </span>
      <span id="f0363"> I wish I had known it was your friend.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0364">&#34;I am very glad you didn&#39;t, Harry.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0365">&#34;Why?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0366">&#34;I don&#39;t want you to meet him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0367">&#34;You don&#39;t want me to meet him?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0368">&#34;No.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0369">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0370">Dorian Gray is in the studio, sir,&#34; said the butler, coming into the garden.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0371">&#34;You must introduce me now,&#34; cried Lord Henry, laughing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0372">The painter turned to his servant, who stood blinking in the sunlight. </span>
      <span id="f0373">&#34;Ask Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0374">Gray to wait, Parker:  I shall be in in a few moments.&#34; The man bowed and went up the walk.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0375">Then he looked at Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f0376"> &#34;Dorian Gray is my dearest friend,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f0377"> &#34;He has a simple and a beautiful nature. </span>
      <span id="f0378"> Your aunt was quite right in what she said of him. </span>
      <span id="f0379"> Don&#39;t spoil him. </span>
      <span id="f0380"> Don&#39;t try to influence him. </span>
      <span id="f0381"> Your influence would be bad. </span>
      <span id="f0382"> The world is wide, and has many marvellous people in it. </span>
      <span id="f0383"> Don&#39;t take away from me the one person who gives to my art whatever charm it possesses:  my life as an artist depends on him. </span>
      <span id="f0384"> Mind, Harry, I trust you.&#34;  He spoke very slowly, and the words seemed wrung out of him almost against his will.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0385">&#34;What nonsense you talk!&#34; said Lord Henry, smiling, and taking Hallward by the arm, he almost led him into the house.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>