<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER 2</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0386">CHAPTER 2</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0387">As they entered they saw Dorian Gray. </span>
      <span id="f0388"> He was seated at the piano, with his back to them, turning over the pages of a volume of Schumann&#39;s &#34;Forest Scenes.&#34;  &#34;You must lend me these, Basil,&#34; he cried. </span>
      <span id="f0389"> &#34;I want to learn them. </span>
      <span id="f0390"> They are perfectly charming.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0391">&#34;That entirely depends on how you sit to-day, Dorian.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0392">&#34;Oh, I am tired of sitting, and I don&#39;t want a life-sized portrait of myself,&#34; answered the lad, swinging round on the music-stool in a wilful, petulant manner. </span>
      <span id="f0393"> When he caught sight of Lord Henry, a faint blush coloured his cheeks for a moment, and he started up. </span>
      <span id="f0394"> &#34;I beg your pardon, Basil, but I didn&#39;t know you had any one with you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0395">&#34;This is Lord Henry Wotton, Dorian, an old Oxford friend of mine. </span>
      <span id="f0396"> I have just been telling him what a capital sitter you were, and now you have spoiled everything.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0397">&#34;You have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0398">Gray,&#34; said Lord Henry, stepping forward and extending his hand. </span>
      <span id="f0399"> &#34;My aunt has often spoken to me about you. </span>
      <span id="f0400"> You are one of her favourites, and, I am afraid, one of her victims also.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0401">&#34;I am in Lady Agatha&#39;s black books at present,&#34; answered Dorian with a funny look of penitence. </span>
      <span id="f0402"> &#34;I promised to go to a club in Whitechapel with her last Tuesday, and I really forgot all about it. </span>
      <span id="f0403"> We were to have played a duet together--three duets, I believe. </span>
      <span id="f0404"> I don&#39;t know what she will say to me. </span>
      <span id="f0405"> I am far too frightened to call.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0406">&#34;Oh, I will make your peace with my aunt. </span>
      <span id="f0407"> She is quite devoted to you. </span>
      <span id="f0408">And I don&#39;t think it really matters about your not being there. </span>
      <span id="f0409"> The audience probably thought it was a duet. </span>
      <span id="f0410"> When Aunt Agatha sits down to the piano, she makes quite enough noise for two people.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0411">&#34;That is very horrid to her, and not very nice to me,&#34; answered Dorian, laughing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0412">Lord Henry looked at him. </span>
      <span id="f0413"> Yes, he was certainly wonderfully handsome, with his finely curved scarlet lips, his frank blue eyes, his crisp gold hair. </span>
      <span id="f0414"> There was something in his face that made one trust him at once. </span>
      <span id="f0415"> All the candour of youth was there, as well as all youth&#39;s passionate purity. </span>
      <span id="f0416"> One felt that he had kept himself unspotted from the world. </span>
      <span id="f0417"> No wonder Basil Hallward worshipped him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0418">&#34;You are too charming to go in for philanthropy, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0419">Gray--far too charming.&#34; And Lord Henry flung himself down on the divan and opened his cigarette-case.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0420">The painter had been busy mixing his colours and getting his brushes ready. </span>
      <span id="f0421"> He was looking worried, and when he heard Lord Henry&#39;s last remark, he glanced at him, hesitated for a moment, and then said, &#34;Harry, I want to finish this picture to-day. </span>
      <span id="f0422">Would you think it awfully rude of me if I asked you to go away?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0423">Lord Henry smiled and looked at Dorian Gray. </span>
      <span id="f0424"> &#34;Am I to go, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0425">Gray?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0426">&#34;Oh, please don&#39;t, Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f0427"> I see that Basil is in one of his sulky moods, and I can&#39;t bear him when he sulks. </span>
      <span id="f0428"> Besides, I want you to tell me why I should not go in for philanthropy.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0429">&#34;I don&#39;t know that I shall tell you that, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0430">Gray. </span>
      <span id="f0431"> It is so tedious a subject that one would have to talk seriously about it. </span>
      <span id="f0432"> But I certainly shall not run away, now that you have asked me to stop. </span>
      <span id="f0433"> You don&#39;t really mind, Basil, do you? </span>
      <span id="f0434"> You have often told me that you liked your sitters to have some one to chat to.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0435">Hallward bit his lip. </span>
      <span id="f0436"> &#34;If Dorian wishes it, of course you must stay. </span>
      <span id="f0437">Dorian&#39;s whims are laws to everybody, except himself.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0438">Lord Henry took up his hat and gloves. </span>
      <span id="f0439"> &#34;You are very pressing, Basil, but I am afraid I must go. </span>
      <span id="f0440"> I have promised to meet a man at the Orleans. </span>
      <span id="f0441"> Good-bye, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0442">Gray. </span>
      <span id="f0443"> Come and see me some afternoon in Curzon Street. </span>
      <span id="f0444"> I am nearly always at home at five o&#39;clock. </span>
      <span id="f0445">Write to me when you are coming. </span>
      <span id="f0446"> I should be sorry to miss you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0447">&#34;Basil,&#34; cried Dorian Gray, &#34;if Lord Henry Wotton goes, I shall go, too. </span>
      <span id="f0448"> You never open your lips while you are painting, and it is horribly dull standing on a platform and trying to look pleasant. </span>
      <span id="f0449"> Ask him to stay. </span>
      <span id="f0450"> I insist upon it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0451">&#34;Stay, Harry, to oblige Dorian, and to oblige me,&#34; said Hallward, gazing intently at his picture. </span>
      <span id="f0452"> &#34;It is quite true, I never talk when I am working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully tedious for my unfortunate sitters. </span>
      <span id="f0453"> I beg you to stay.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0454">&#34;But what about my man at the Orleans?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0455">The painter laughed. </span>
      <span id="f0456"> &#34;I don&#39;t think there will be any difficulty about that. </span>
      <span id="f0457"> Sit down again, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f0458"> And now, Dorian, get up on the platform, and don&#39;t move about too much, or pay any attention to what Lord Henry says. </span>
      <span id="f0459"> He has a very bad influence over all his friends, with the single exception of myself.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0460">Dorian Gray stepped up on the dais with the air of a young Greek martyr, and made a little _moue_ of discontent to Lord Henry, to whom he had rather taken a fancy. </span>
      <span id="f0461"> He was so unlike Basil. </span>
      <span id="f0462"> They made a delightful contrast. </span>
      <span id="f0463"> And he had such a beautiful voice. </span>
      <span id="f0464"> After a few moments he said to him, &#34;Have you really a very bad influence, Lord Henry? </span>
      <span id="f0465"> As bad as Basil says?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0466">&#34;There is no such thing as a good influence, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0467">Gray. </span>
      <span id="f0468"> All influence is immoral--immoral from the scientific point of view.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0469">&#34;Why?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0470">&#34;Because to influence a person is to give him one&#39;s own soul. </span>
      <span id="f0471"> He does not think his natural thoughts, or burn with his natural passions. </span>
      <span id="f0472"> His virtues are not real to him. </span>
      <span id="f0473"> His sins, if there are such things as sins, are borrowed. </span>
      <span id="f0474"> He becomes an echo of some one else&#39;s music, an actor of a part that has not been written for him. </span>
      <span id="f0475"> The aim of life is self-development. </span>
      <span id="f0476">To realize one&#39;s nature perfectly--that is what each of us is here for. </span>
      <span id="f0477"> People are afraid of themselves, nowadays. </span>
      <span id="f0478"> They have forgotten the highest of all duties, the duty that one owes to one&#39;s self. </span>
      <span id="f0479"> Of course, they are charitable. </span>
      <span id="f0480"> They feed the hungry and clothe the beggar. </span>
      <span id="f0481"> But their own souls starve, and are naked. </span>
      <span id="f0482"> Courage has gone out of our race. </span>
      <span id="f0483"> Perhaps we never really had it. </span>
      <span id="f0484"> The terror of society, which is the basis of morals, the terror of God, which is the secret of religion--these are the two things that govern us. </span>
      <span id="f0485"> And yet--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0486">&#34;Just turn your head a little more to the right, Dorian, like a good boy,&#34; said the painter, deep in his work and conscious only that a look had come into the lad&#39;s face that he had never seen there before.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0487">&#34;And yet,&#34; continued Lord Henry, in his low, musical voice, and with that graceful wave of the hand that was always so characteristic of him, and that he had even in his Eton days, &#34;I believe that if one man were to live out his life fully and completely, were to give form to every feeling, expression to every thought, reality to every dream--I believe that the world would gain such a fresh impulse of joy that we would forget all the maladies of mediaevalism, and return to the Hellenic ideal--to something finer, richer than the Hellenic ideal, it may be. </span>
      <span id="f0488"> But the bravest man amongst us is afraid of himself. </span>
      <span id="f0489"> The mutilation of the savage has its tragic survival in the self-denial that mars our lives. </span>
      <span id="f0490"> We are punished for our refusals. </span>
      <span id="f0491"> Every impulse that we strive to strangle broods in the mind and poisons us. </span>
      <span id="f0492"> The body sins once, and has done with its sin, for action is a mode of purification. </span>
      <span id="f0493"> Nothing remains then but the recollection of a pleasure, or the luxury of a regret. </span>
      <span id="f0494"> The only way to get rid of a temptation is to yield to it. </span>
      <span id="f0495"> Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for the things it has forbidden to itself, with desire for what its monstrous laws have made monstrous and unlawful. </span>
      <span id="f0496"> It has been said that the great events of the world take place in the brain. </span>
      <span id="f0497"> It is in the brain, and the brain only, that the great sins of the world take place also. </span>
      <span id="f0498"> You, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0499">Gray, you yourself, with your rose-red youth and your rose-white boyhood, you have had passions that have made you afraid, thoughts that have filled you with terror, day-dreams and sleeping dreams whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0500">&#34;Stop!&#34; faltered Dorian Gray, &#34;stop! </span>
      <span id="f0501">you bewilder me. </span>
      <span id="f0502"> I don&#39;t know what to say. </span>
      <span id="f0503"> There is some answer to you, but I cannot find it. </span>
      <span id="f0504"> Don&#39;t speak. </span>
      <span id="f0505"> Let me think. </span>
      <span id="f0506"> Or, rather, let me try not to think.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0507">For nearly ten minutes he stood there, motionless, with parted lips and eyes strangely bright. </span>
      <span id="f0508"> He was dimly conscious that entirely fresh influences were at work within him. </span>
      <span id="f0509"> Yet they seemed to him to have come really from himself. </span>
      <span id="f0510"> The few words that Basil&#39;s friend had said to him--words spoken by chance, no doubt, and with wilful paradox in them--had touched some secret chord that had never been touched before, but that he felt was now vibrating and throbbing to curious pulses.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0511">Music had stirred him like that. </span>
      <span id="f0512"> Music had troubled him many times. </span>
      <span id="f0513">But music was not articulate. </span>
      <span id="f0514"> It was not a new world, but rather another chaos, that it created in us. </span>
      <span id="f0515"> Words! </span>
      <span id="f0516"> Mere words! </span>
      <span id="f0517"> How terrible they were! </span>
      <span id="f0518"> How clear, and vivid, and cruel! </span>
      <span id="f0519"> One could not escape from them. </span>
      <span id="f0520"> And yet what a subtle magic there was in them! </span>
      <span id="f0521"> They seemed to be able to give a plastic form to formless things, and to have a music of their own as sweet as that of viol or of lute. </span>
      <span id="f0522"> Mere words! </span>
      <span id="f0523"> Was there anything so real as words?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0524">Yes; there had been things in his boyhood that he had not understood. </span>
      <span id="f0525">He understood them now. </span>
      <span id="f0526"> Life suddenly became fiery-coloured to him. </span>
      <span id="f0527">It seemed to him that he had been walking in fire. </span>
      <span id="f0528"> Why had he not known it?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0529">With his subtle smile, Lord Henry watched him. </span>
      <span id="f0530"> He knew the precise psychological moment when to say nothing. </span>
      <span id="f0531"> He felt intensely interested. </span>
      <span id="f0532"> He was amazed at the sudden impression that his words had produced, and, remembering a book that he had read when he was sixteen, a book which had revealed to him much that he had not known before, he wondered whether Dorian Gray was passing through a similar experience. </span>
      <span id="f0533">He had merely shot an arrow into the air. </span>
      <span id="f0534"> Had it hit the mark? </span>
      <span id="f0535"> How fascinating the lad was!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0536">Hallward painted away with that marvellous bold touch of his, that had the true refinement and perfect delicacy that in art, at any rate comes only from strength. </span>
      <span id="f0537"> He was unconscious of the silence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0538">&#34;Basil, I am tired of standing,&#34; cried Dorian Gray suddenly. </span>
      <span id="f0539"> &#34;I must go out and sit in the garden. </span>
      <span id="f0540"> The air is stifling here.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0541">&#34;My dear fellow, I am so sorry. </span>
      <span id="f0542"> When I am painting, I can&#39;t think of anything else. </span>
      <span id="f0543"> But you never sat better. </span>
      <span id="f0544"> You were perfectly still. </span>
      <span id="f0545">And I have caught the effect I wanted--the half-parted lips and the bright look in the eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0546"> I don&#39;t know what Harry has been saying to you, but he has certainly made you have the most wonderful expression. </span>
      <span id="f0547">I suppose he has been paying you compliments. </span>
      <span id="f0548"> You mustn&#39;t believe a word that he says.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0549">&#34;He has certainly not been paying me compliments. </span>
      <span id="f0550"> Perhaps that is the reason that I don&#39;t believe anything he has told me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0551">&#34;You know you believe it all,&#34; said Lord Henry, looking at him with his dreamy languorous eyes. </span>
      <span id="f0552"> &#34;I will go out to the garden with you. </span>
      <span id="f0553"> It is horribly hot in the studio. </span>
      <span id="f0554"> Basil, let us have something iced to drink, something with strawberries in it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0555">&#34;Certainly, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f0556"> Just touch the bell, and when Parker comes I will tell him what you want. </span>
      <span id="f0557"> I have got to work up this background, so I will join you later on. </span>
      <span id="f0558"> Don&#39;t keep Dorian too long. </span>
      <span id="f0559"> I have never been in better form for painting than I am to-day. </span>
      <span id="f0560">This is going to be my masterpiece. </span>
      <span id="f0561"> It is my masterpiece as it stands.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0562">Lord Henry went out to the garden and found Dorian Gray burying his face in the great cool lilac-blossoms, feverishly drinking in their perfume as if it had been wine. </span>
      <span id="f0563"> He came close to him and put his hand upon his shoulder. </span>
      <span id="f0564"> &#34;You are quite right to do that,&#34; he murmured. </span>
      <span id="f0565">&#34;Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure the senses but the soul.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0566">The lad started and drew back. </span>
      <span id="f0567"> He was bareheaded, and the leaves had tossed his rebellious curls and tangled all their gilded threads. </span>
      <span id="f0568">There was a look of fear in his eyes, such as people have when they are suddenly awakened. </span>
      <span id="f0569"> His finely chiselled nostrils quivered, and some hidden nerve shook the scarlet of his lips and left them trembling.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0570">&#34;Yes,&#34; continued Lord Henry, &#34;that is one of the great secrets of life--to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul. </span>
      <span id="f0571"> You are a wonderful creation. </span>
      <span id="f0572"> You know more than you think you know, just as you know less than you want to know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0573">Dorian Gray frowned and turned his head away. </span>
      <span id="f0574"> He could not help liking the tall, graceful young man who was standing by him. </span>
      <span id="f0575"> His romantic, olive-coloured face and worn expression interested him. </span>
      <span id="f0576"> There was something in his low languid voice that was absolutely fascinating. </span>
      <span id="f0577">His cool, white, flowerlike hands, even, had a curious charm. </span>
      <span id="f0578"> They moved, as he spoke, like music, and seemed to have a language of their own. </span>
      <span id="f0579"> But he felt afraid of him, and ashamed of being afraid. </span>
      <span id="f0580"> Why had it been left for a stranger to reveal him to himself? </span>
      <span id="f0581"> He had known Basil Hallward for months, but the friendship between them had never altered him. </span>
      <span id="f0582"> Suddenly there had come some one across his life who seemed to have disclosed to him life&#39;s mystery. </span>
      <span id="f0583"> And, yet, what was there to be afraid of? </span>
      <span id="f0584"> He was not a schoolboy or a girl. </span>
      <span id="f0585"> It was absurd to be frightened.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0586">&#34;Let us go and sit in the shade,&#34; said Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f0587"> &#34;Parker has brought out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, you will be quite spoiled, and Basil will never paint you again. </span>
      <span id="f0588"> You really must not allow yourself to become sunburnt. </span>
      <span id="f0589"> It would be unbecoming.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0590">&#34;What can it matter?&#34; cried Dorian Gray, laughing, as he sat down on the seat at the end of the garden.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0591">&#34;It should matter everything to you, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0592">Gray.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0593">&#34;Why?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0594">&#34;Because you have the most marvellous youth, and youth is the one thing worth having.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0595">&#34;I don&#39;t feel that, Lord Henry.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0596">&#34;No, you don&#39;t feel it now. </span>
      <span id="f0597"> Some day, when you are old and wrinkled and ugly, when thought has seared your forehead with its lines, and passion branded your lips with its hideous fires, you will feel it, you will feel it terribly. </span>
      <span id="f0598"> Now, wherever you go, you charm the world. </span>
      <span id="f0599">Will it always be so? </span>
      <span id="f0600">... </span>
      <span id="f0601">You have a wonderfully beautiful face, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0602">Gray. </span>
      <span id="f0603"> Don&#39;t frown. </span>
      <span id="f0604"> You have. </span>
      <span id="f0605"> And beauty is a form of genius--is higher, indeed, than genius, as it needs no explanation. </span>
      <span id="f0606"> It is of the great facts of the world, like sunlight, or spring-time, or the reflection in dark waters of that silver shell we call the moon. </span>
      <span id="f0607"> It cannot be questioned. </span>
      <span id="f0608"> It has its divine right of sovereignty. </span>
      <span id="f0609"> It makes princes of those who have it. </span>
      <span id="f0610"> You smile? </span>
      <span id="f0611"> Ah! </span>
      <span id="f0612">when you have lost it you won&#39;t smile.... </span>
      <span id="f0613">People say sometimes that beauty is only superficial. </span>
      <span id="f0614"> That may be so, but at least it is not so superficial as thought is. </span>
      <span id="f0615"> To me, beauty is the wonder of wonders. </span>
      <span id="f0616"> It is only shallow people who do not judge by appearances. </span>
      <span id="f0617"> The true mystery of the world is the visible, not the invisible.... </span>
      <span id="f0618">Yes, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0619">Gray, the gods have been good to you. </span>
      <span id="f0620"> But what the gods give they quickly take away. </span>
      <span id="f0621"> You have only a few years in which to live really, perfectly, and fully. </span>
      <span id="f0622"> When your youth goes, your beauty will go with it, and then you will suddenly discover that there are no triumphs left for you, or have to content yourself with those mean triumphs that the memory of your past will make more bitter than defeats. </span>
      <span id="f0623"> Every month as it wanes brings you nearer to something dreadful. </span>
      <span id="f0624"> Time is jealous of you, and wars against your lilies and your roses. </span>
      <span id="f0625"> You will become sallow, and hollow-cheeked, and dull-eyed. </span>
      <span id="f0626"> You will suffer horribly.... </span>
      <span id="f0627">Ah! </span>
      <span id="f0628">realize your youth while you have it. </span>
      <span id="f0629"> Don&#39;t squander the gold of your days, listening to the tedious, trying to improve the hopeless failure, or giving away your life to the ignorant, the common, and the vulgar. </span>
      <span id="f0630">These are the sickly aims, the false ideals, of our age. </span>
      <span id="f0631"> Live! </span>
      <span id="f0632"> Live the wonderful life that is in you! </span>
      <span id="f0633"> Let nothing be lost upon you. </span>
      <span id="f0634"> Be always searching for new sensations. </span>
      <span id="f0635"> Be afraid of nothing.... </span>
      <span id="f0636">A new Hedonism--that is what our century wants. </span>
      <span id="f0637"> You might be its visible symbol. </span>
      <span id="f0638"> With your personality there is nothing you could not do. </span>
      <span id="f0639"> The world belongs to you for a season.... </span>
      <span id="f0640">The moment I met you I saw that you were quite unconscious of what you really are, of what you really might be. </span>
      <span id="f0641"> There was so much in you that charmed me that I felt I must tell you something about yourself. </span>
      <span id="f0642"> I thought how tragic it would be if you were wasted. </span>
      <span id="f0643"> For there is such a little time that your youth will last--such a little time. </span>
      <span id="f0644"> The common hill-flowers wither, but they blossom again. </span>
      <span id="f0645"> The laburnum will be as yellow next June as it is now. </span>
      <span id="f0646">In a month there will be purple stars on the clematis, and year after year the green night of its leaves will hold its purple stars. </span>
      <span id="f0647"> But we never get back our youth. </span>
      <span id="f0648"> The pulse of joy that beats in us at twenty becomes sluggish. </span>
      <span id="f0649"> Our limbs fail, our senses rot. </span>
      <span id="f0650"> We degenerate into hideous puppets, haunted by the memory of the passions of which we were too much afraid, and the exquisite temptations that we had not the courage to yield to. </span>
      <span id="f0651"> Youth! </span>
      <span id="f0652"> Youth! </span>
      <span id="f0653"> There is absolutely nothing in the world but youth!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0654">Dorian Gray listened, open-eyed and wondering. </span>
      <span id="f0655"> The spray of lilac fell from his hand upon the gravel. </span>
      <span id="f0656"> A furry bee came and buzzed round it for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f0657"> Then it began to scramble all over the oval stellated globe of the tiny blossoms. </span>
      <span id="f0658"> He watched it with that strange interest in trivial things that we try to develop when things of high import make us afraid, or when we are stirred by some new emotion for which we cannot find expression, or when some thought that terrifies us lays sudden siege to the brain and calls on us to yield. </span>
      <span id="f0659"> After a time the bee flew away. </span>
      <span id="f0660"> He saw it creeping into the stained trumpet of a Tyrian convolvulus. </span>
      <span id="f0661"> The flower seemed to quiver, and then swayed gently to and fro.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0662">Suddenly the painter appeared at the door of the studio and made staccato signs for them to come in. </span>
      <span id="f0663"> They turned to each other and smiled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0664">&#34;I am waiting,&#34; he cried. </span>
      <span id="f0665"> &#34;Do come in. </span>
      <span id="f0666"> The light is quite perfect, and you can bring your drinks.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0667">They rose up and sauntered down the walk together. </span>
      <span id="f0668"> Two green-and-white butterflies fluttered past them, and in the pear-tree at the corner of the garden a thrush began to sing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0669">&#34;You are glad you have met me, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0670">Gray,&#34; said Lord Henry, looking at him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0671">&#34;Yes, I am glad now. </span>
      <span id="f0672"> I wonder shall I always be glad?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0673">&#34;Always! </span>
      <span id="f0674"> That is a dreadful word. </span>
      <span id="f0675"> It makes me shudder when I hear it. </span>
      <span id="f0676">Women are so fond of using it. </span>
      <span id="f0677"> They spoil every romance by trying to make it last for ever. </span>
      <span id="f0678"> It is a meaningless word, too. </span>
      <span id="f0679"> The only difference between a caprice and a lifelong passion is that the caprice lasts a little longer.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0680">As they entered the studio, Dorian Gray put his hand upon Lord Henry&#39;s arm. </span>
      <span id="f0681"> &#34;In that case, let our friendship be a caprice,&#34; he murmured, flushing at his own boldness, then stepped up on the platform and resumed his pose.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0682">Lord Henry flung himself into a large wicker arm-chair and watched him. </span>
      <span id="f0683">The sweep and dash of the brush on the canvas made the only sound that broke the stillness, except when, now and then, Hallward stepped back to look at his work from a distance. </span>
      <span id="f0684"> In the slanting beams that streamed through the open doorway the dust danced and was golden. </span>
      <span id="f0685"> The heavy scent of the roses seemed to brood over everything.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0686">After about a quarter of an hour Hallward stopped painting, looked for a long time at Dorian Gray, and then for a long time at the picture, biting the end of one of his huge brushes and frowning. </span>
      <span id="f0687"> &#34;It is quite finished,&#34; he cried at last, and stooping down he wrote his name in long vermilion letters on the left-hand corner of the canvas.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0688">Lord Henry came over and examined the picture. </span>
      <span id="f0689"> It was certainly a wonderful work of art, and a wonderful likeness as well.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0690">&#34;My dear fellow, I congratulate you most warmly,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f0691"> &#34;It is the finest portrait of modern times. </span>
      <span id="f0692"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0693">Gray, come over and look at yourself.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0694">The lad started, as if awakened from some dream.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0695">&#34;Is it really finished?&#34; he murmured, stepping down from the platform.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0696">&#34;Quite finished,&#34; said the painter. </span>
      <span id="f0697"> &#34;And you have sat splendidly to-day. </span>
      <span id="f0698">I am awfully obliged to you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0699">&#34;That is entirely due to me,&#34; broke in Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f0700"> &#34;Isn&#39;t it, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0701">Gray?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0702">Dorian made no answer, but passed listlessly in front of his picture and turned towards it. </span>
      <span id="f0703"> When he saw it he drew back, and his cheeks flushed for a moment with pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f0704"> A look of joy came into his eyes, as if he had recognized himself for the first time. </span>
      <span id="f0705"> He stood there motionless and in wonder, dimly conscious that Hallward was speaking to him, but not catching the meaning of his words. </span>
      <span id="f0706"> The sense of his own beauty came on him like a revelation. </span>
      <span id="f0707"> He had never felt it before. </span>
      <span id="f0708">Basil Hallward&#39;s compliments had seemed to him to be merely the charming exaggeration of friendship. </span>
      <span id="f0709"> He had listened to them, laughed at them, forgotten them. </span>
      <span id="f0710"> They had not influenced his nature. </span>
      <span id="f0711"> Then had come Lord Henry Wotton with his strange panegyric on youth, his terrible warning of its brevity. </span>
      <span id="f0712"> That had stirred him at the time, and now, as he stood gazing at the shadow of his own loveliness, the full reality of the description flashed across him. </span>
      <span id="f0713"> Yes, there would be a day when his face would be wrinkled and wizen, his eyes dim and colourless, the grace of his figure broken and deformed. </span>
      <span id="f0714"> The scarlet would pass away from his lips and the gold steal from his hair. </span>
      <span id="f0715"> The life that was to make his soul would mar his body. </span>
      <span id="f0716"> He would become dreadful, hideous, and uncouth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0717">As he thought of it, a sharp pang of pain struck through him like a knife and made each delicate fibre of his nature quiver. </span>
      <span id="f0718"> His eyes deepened into amethyst, and across them came a mist of tears. </span>
      <span id="f0719"> He felt as if a hand of ice had been laid upon his heart.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0720">&#34;Don&#39;t you like it?&#34; cried Hallward at last, stung a little by the lad&#39;s silence, not understanding what it meant.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0721">&#34;Of course he likes it,&#34; said Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f0722"> &#34;Who wouldn&#39;t like it? </span>
      <span id="f0723"> It is one of the greatest things in modern art. </span>
      <span id="f0724"> I will give you anything you like to ask for it. </span>
      <span id="f0725"> I must have it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0726">&#34;It is not my property, Harry.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0727">&#34;Whose property is it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0728">&#34;Dorian&#39;s, of course,&#34; answered the painter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0729">&#34;He is a very lucky fellow.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0730">&#34;How sad it is!&#34; murmured Dorian Gray with his eyes still fixed upon his own portrait. </span>
      <span id="f0731"> &#34;How sad it is! </span>
      <span id="f0732"> I shall grow old, and horrible, and dreadful. </span>
      <span id="f0733"> But this picture will remain always young. </span>
      <span id="f0734"> It will never be older than this particular day of June.... </span>
      <span id="f0735">If it were only the other way! </span>
      <span id="f0736"> If it were I who was to be always young, and the picture that was to grow old! </span>
      <span id="f0737"> For that--for that--I would give everything! </span>
      <span id="f0738"> Yes, there is nothing in the whole world I would not give! </span>
      <span id="f0739"> I would give my soul for that!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0740">&#34;You would hardly care for such an arrangement, Basil,&#34; cried Lord Henry, laughing. </span>
      <span id="f0741"> &#34;It would be rather hard lines on your work.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0742">&#34;I should object very strongly, Harry,&#34; said Hallward.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0743">Dorian Gray turned and looked at him. </span>
      <span id="f0744"> &#34;I believe you would, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f0745">You like your art better than your friends. </span>
      <span id="f0746"> I am no more to you than a green bronze figure. </span>
      <span id="f0747"> Hardly as much, I dare say.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0748">The painter stared in amazement. </span>
      <span id="f0749"> It was so unlike Dorian to speak like that. </span>
      <span id="f0750"> What had happened? </span>
      <span id="f0751"> He seemed quite angry. </span>
      <span id="f0752"> His face was flushed and his cheeks burning.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0753">&#34;Yes,&#34; he continued, &#34;I am less to you than your ivory Hermes or your silver Faun. </span>
      <span id="f0754"> You will like them always. </span>
      <span id="f0755"> How long will you like me? </span>
      <span id="f0756">Till I have my first wrinkle, I suppose. </span>
      <span id="f0757"> I know, now, that when one loses one&#39;s good looks, whatever they may be, one loses everything. </span>
      <span id="f0758">Your picture has taught me that. </span>
      <span id="f0759"> Lord Henry Wotton is perfectly right. </span>
      <span id="f0760">Youth is the only thing worth having. </span>
      <span id="f0761"> When I find that I am growing old, I shall kill myself.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0762">Hallward turned pale and caught his hand. </span>
      <span id="f0763"> &#34;Dorian! </span>
      <span id="f0764"> Dorian!&#34; he cried, &#34;don&#39;t talk like that. </span>
      <span id="f0765"> I have never had such a friend as you, and I shall never have such another. </span>
      <span id="f0766"> You are not jealous of material things, are you?--you who are finer than any of them!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0767">&#34;I am jealous of everything whose beauty does not die. </span>
      <span id="f0768"> I am jealous of the portrait you have painted of me. </span>
      <span id="f0769"> Why should it keep what I must lose? </span>
      <span id="f0770"> Every moment that passes takes something from me and gives something to it. </span>
      <span id="f0771"> Oh, if it were only the other way! </span>
      <span id="f0772"> If the picture could change, and I could be always what I am now! </span>
      <span id="f0773"> Why did you paint it? </span>
      <span id="f0774"> It will mock me some day--mock me horribly!&#34;  The hot tears welled into his eyes; he tore his hand away and, flinging himself on the divan, he buried his face in the cushions, as though he was praying.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0775">&#34;This is your doing, Harry,&#34; said the painter bitterly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0776">Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f0777"> &#34;It is the real Dorian Gray--that is all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0778">&#34;It is not.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0779">&#34;If it is not, what have I to do with it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0780">&#34;You should have gone away when I asked you,&#34; he muttered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0781">&#34;I stayed when you asked me,&#34; was Lord Henry&#39;s answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0782">&#34;Harry, I can&#39;t quarrel with my two best friends at once, but between you both you have made me hate the finest piece of work I have ever done, and I will destroy it. </span>
      <span id="f0783"> What is it but canvas and colour? </span>
      <span id="f0784"> I will not let it come across our three lives and mar them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0785">Dorian Gray lifted his golden head from the pillow, and with pallid face and tear-stained eyes, looked at him as he walked over to the deal painting-table that was set beneath the high curtained window. </span>
      <span id="f0786"> What was he doing there? </span>
      <span id="f0787"> His fingers were straying about among the litter of tin tubes and dry brushes, seeking for something. </span>
      <span id="f0788"> Yes, it was for the long palette-knife, with its thin blade of lithe steel. </span>
      <span id="f0789"> He had found it at last. </span>
      <span id="f0790"> He was going to rip up the canvas.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0791">With a stifled sob the lad leaped from the couch, and, rushing over to Hallward, tore the knife out of his hand, and flung it to the end of the studio. </span>
      <span id="f0792"> &#34;Don&#39;t, Basil, don&#39;t!&#34; he cried. </span>
      <span id="f0793"> &#34;It would be murder!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0794">&#34;I am glad you appreciate my work at last, Dorian,&#34; said the painter coldly when he had recovered from his surprise. </span>
      <span id="f0795"> &#34;I never thought you would.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0796">&#34;Appreciate it? </span>
      <span id="f0797"> I am in love with it, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f0798"> It is part of myself. </span>
      <span id="f0799"> I feel that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0800">&#34;Well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed, and sent home. </span>
      <span id="f0801"> Then you can do what you like with yourself.&#34; And he walked across the room and rang the bell for tea. </span>
      <span id="f0802"> &#34;You will have tea, of course, Dorian? </span>
      <span id="f0803"> And so will you, Harry? </span>
      <span id="f0804"> Or do you object to such simple pleasures?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0805">&#34;I adore simple pleasures,&#34; said Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f0806"> &#34;They are the last refuge of the complex. </span>
      <span id="f0807"> But I don&#39;t like scenes, except on the stage. </span>
      <span id="f0808"> What absurd fellows you are, both of you! </span>
      <span id="f0809"> I wonder who it was defined man as a rational animal. </span>
      <span id="f0810"> It was the most premature definition ever given. </span>
      <span id="f0811">Man is many things, but he is not rational. </span>
      <span id="f0812"> I am glad he is not, after all--though I wish you chaps would not squabble over the picture. </span>
      <span id="f0813"> You had much better let me have it, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f0814"> This silly boy doesn&#39;t really want it, and I really do.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0815">&#34;If you let any one have it but me, Basil, I shall never forgive you!&#34; cried Dorian Gray; &#34;and I don&#39;t allow people to call me a silly boy.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0816">&#34;You know the picture is yours, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f0817"> I gave it to you before it existed.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0818">&#34;And you know you have been a little silly, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0819">Gray, and that you don&#39;t really object to being reminded that you are extremely young.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0820">&#34;I should have objected very strongly this morning, Lord Henry.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0821">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f0822">this morning! </span>
      <span id="f0823"> You have lived since then.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0824">There came a knock at the door, and the butler entered with a laden tea-tray and set it down upon a small Japanese table. </span>
      <span id="f0825"> There was a rattle of cups and saucers and the hissing of a fluted Georgian urn. </span>
      <span id="f0826">Two globe-shaped china dishes were brought in by a page. </span>
      <span id="f0827"> Dorian Gray went over and poured out the tea. </span>
      <span id="f0828"> The two men sauntered languidly to the table and examined what was under the covers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0829">&#34;Let us go to the theatre to-night,&#34; said Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f0830"> &#34;There is sure to be something on, somewhere. </span>
      <span id="f0831"> I have promised to dine at White&#39;s, but it is only with an old friend, so I can send him a wire to say that I am ill, or that I am prevented from coming in consequence of a subsequent engagement. </span>
      <span id="f0832"> I think that would be a rather nice excuse:  it would have all the surprise of candour.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0833">&#34;It is such a bore putting on one&#39;s dress-clothes,&#34; muttered Hallward. </span>
      <span id="f0834">&#34;And, when one has them on, they are so horrid.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0835">&#34;Yes,&#34; answered Lord Henry dreamily, &#34;the costume of the nineteenth century is detestable. </span>
      <span id="f0836"> It is so sombre, so depressing. </span>
      <span id="f0837"> Sin is the only real colour-element left in modern life.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0838">&#34;You really must not say things like that before Dorian, Harry.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0839">&#34;Before which Dorian? </span>
      <span id="f0840"> The one who is pouring out tea for us, or the one in the picture?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0841">&#34;Before either.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0842">&#34;I should like to come to the theatre with you, Lord Henry,&#34; said the lad.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0843">&#34;Then you shall come; and you will come, too, Basil, won&#39;t you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0844">&#34;I can&#39;t, really. </span>
      <span id="f0845"> I would sooner not. </span>
      <span id="f0846"> I have a lot of work to do.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0847">&#34;Well, then, you and I will go alone, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0848">Gray.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0849">&#34;I should like that awfully.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0850">The painter bit his lip and walked over, cup in hand, to the picture. </span>
      <span id="f0851">&#34;I shall stay with the real Dorian,&#34; he said, sadly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0852">&#34;Is it the real Dorian?&#34; cried the original of the portrait, strolling across to him. </span>
      <span id="f0853"> &#34;Am I really like that?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0854">&#34;Yes; you are just like that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0855">&#34;How wonderful, Basil!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0856">&#34;At least you are like it in appearance. </span>
      <span id="f0857"> But it will never alter,&#34; sighed Hallward. </span>
      <span id="f0858"> &#34;That is something.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0859">&#34;What a fuss people make about fidelity!&#34; exclaimed Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f0860"> &#34;Why, even in love it is purely a question for physiology. </span>
      <span id="f0861"> It has nothing to do with our own will. </span>
      <span id="f0862"> Young men want to be faithful, and are not; old men want to be faithless, and cannot: that is all one can say.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0863">&#34;Don&#39;t go to the theatre to-night, Dorian,&#34; said Hallward. </span>
      <span id="f0864"> &#34;Stop and dine with me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0865">&#34;I can&#39;t, Basil.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0866">&#34;Why?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0867">&#34;Because I have promised Lord Henry Wotton to go with him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0868">&#34;He won&#39;t like you the better for keeping your promises. </span>
      <span id="f0869"> He always breaks his own. </span>
      <span id="f0870"> I beg you not to go.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0871">Dorian Gray laughed and shook his head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0872">&#34;I entreat you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0873">The lad hesitated, and looked over at Lord Henry, who was watching them from the tea-table with an amused smile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0874">&#34;I must go, Basil,&#34; he answered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0875">&#34;Very well,&#34; said Hallward, and he went over and laid down his cup on the tray. </span>
      <span id="f0876"> &#34;It is rather late, and, as you have to dress, you had better lose no time. </span>
      <span id="f0877"> Good-bye, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f0878"> Good-bye, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f0879"> Come and see me soon. </span>
      <span id="f0880"> Come to-morrow.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0881">&#34;Certainly.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0882">&#34;You won&#39;t forget?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0883">&#34;No, of course not,&#34; cried Dorian.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0884">&#34;And ... </span>
      <span id="f0885">Harry!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0886">&#34;Yes, Basil?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0887">&#34;Remember what I asked you, when we were in the garden this morning.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0888">&#34;I have forgotten it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0889">&#34;I trust you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0890">&#34;I wish I could trust myself,&#34; said Lord Henry, laughing. </span>
      <span id="f0891"> &#34;Come, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0892">Gray, my hansom is outside, and I can drop you at your own place. </span>
      <span id="f0893">Good-bye, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f0894"> It has been a most interesting afternoon.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0895">As the door closed behind them, the painter flung himself down on a sofa, and a look of pain came into his face.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>