<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f0896">CHAPTER 3</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f0897">At half-past twelve next day Lord Henry Wotton strolled from Curzon Street over to the Albany to call on his uncle, Lord Fermor, a genial if somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom the outside world called selfish because it derived no particular benefit from him, but who was considered generous by Society as he fed the people who amused him. </span>
      <span id="f0898">His father had been our ambassador at Madrid when Isabella was young and Prim unthought of, but had retired from the diplomatic service in a capricious moment of annoyance on not being offered the Embassy at Paris, a post to which he considered that he was fully entitled by reason of his birth, his indolence, the good English of his dispatches, and his inordinate passion for pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f0899"> The son, who had been his father&#39;s secretary, had resigned along with his chief, somewhat foolishly as was thought at the time, and on succeeding some months later to the title, had set himself to the serious study of the great aristocratic art of doing absolutely nothing. </span>
      <span id="f0900"> He had two large town houses, but preferred to live in chambers as it was less trouble, and took most of his meals at his club. </span>
      <span id="f0901"> He paid some attention to the management of his collieries in the Midland counties, excusing himself for this taint of industry on the ground that the one advantage of having coal was that it enabled a gentleman to afford the decency of burning wood on his own hearth. </span>
      <span id="f0902"> In politics he was a Tory, except when the Tories were in office, during which period he roundly abused them for being a pack of Radicals. </span>
      <span id="f0903"> He was a hero to his valet, who bullied him, and a terror to most of his relations, whom he bullied in turn. </span>
      <span id="f0904">Only England could have produced him, and he always said that the country was going to the dogs. </span>
      <span id="f0905"> His principles were out of date, but there was a good deal to be said for his prejudices.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0906">When Lord Henry entered the room, he found his uncle sitting in a rough shooting-coat, smoking a cheroot and grumbling over _The Times_. </span>
      <span id="f0907"> &#34;Well, Harry,&#34; said the old gentleman, &#34;what brings you out so early? </span>
      <span id="f0908"> I thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not visible till five.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0909">&#34;Pure family affection, I assure you, Uncle George. </span>
      <span id="f0910"> I want to get something out of you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0911">&#34;Money, I suppose,&#34; said Lord Fermor, making a wry face. </span>
      <span id="f0912"> &#34;Well, sit down and tell me all about it. </span>
      <span id="f0913"> Young people, nowadays, imagine that money is everything.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0914">&#34;Yes,&#34; murmured Lord Henry, settling his button-hole in his coat; &#34;and when they grow older they know it. </span>
      <span id="f0915"> But I don&#39;t want money. </span>
      <span id="f0916"> It is only people who pay their bills who want that, Uncle George, and I never pay mine. </span>
      <span id="f0917"> Credit is the capital of a younger son, and one lives charmingly upon it. </span>
      <span id="f0918"> Besides, I always deal with Dartmoor&#39;s tradesmen, and consequently they never bother me. </span>
      <span id="f0919"> What I want is information:  not useful information, of course; useless information.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0920">&#34;Well, I can tell you anything that is in an English Blue Book, Harry, although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense. </span>
      <span id="f0921"> When I was in the Diplomatic, things were much better. </span>
      <span id="f0922"> But I hear they let them in now by examination. </span>
      <span id="f0923"> What can you expect? </span>
      <span id="f0924"> Examinations, sir, are pure humbug from beginning to end. </span>
      <span id="f0925"> If a man is a gentleman, he knows quite enough, and if he is not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0926">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0927">Dorian Gray does not belong to Blue Books, Uncle George,&#34; said Lord Henry languidly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0928">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0929">Dorian Gray? </span>
      <span id="f0930"> Who is he?&#34; asked Lord Fermor, knitting his bushy white eyebrows.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0931">&#34;That is what I have come to learn, Uncle George. </span>
      <span id="f0932"> Or rather, I know who he is. </span>
      <span id="f0933"> He is the last Lord Kelso&#39;s grandson. </span>
      <span id="f0934"> His mother was a Devereux, Lady Margaret Devereux. </span>
      <span id="f0935"> I want you to tell me about his mother. </span>
      <span id="f0936"> What was she like? </span>
      <span id="f0937"> Whom did she marry? </span>
      <span id="f0938"> You have known nearly everybody in your time, so you might have known her. </span>
      <span id="f0939"> I am very much interested in Mr. </span>
      <span id="f0940">Gray at present. </span>
      <span id="f0941"> I have only just met him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0942">&#34;Kelso&#39;s grandson!&#34; echoed the old gentleman. </span>
      <span id="f0943"> &#34;Kelso&#39;s grandson! </span>
      <span id="f0944">... </span>
      <span id="f0945">Of course.... </span>
      <span id="f0946">I knew his mother intimately. </span>
      <span id="f0947"> I believe I was at her christening. </span>
      <span id="f0948"> She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, Margaret Devereux, and made all the men frantic by running away with a penniless young fellow--a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, or something of that kind. </span>
      <span id="f0949"> Certainly. </span>
      <span id="f0950"> I remember the whole thing as if it happened yesterday. </span>
      <span id="f0951"> The poor chap was killed in a duel at Spa a few months after the marriage. </span>
      <span id="f0952"> There was an ugly story about it. </span>
      <span id="f0953"> They said Kelso got some rascally adventurer, some Belgian brute, to insult his son-in-law in public--paid him, sir, to do it, paid him--and that the fellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon. </span>
      <span id="f0954"> The thing was hushed up, but, egad, Kelso ate his chop alone at the club for some time afterwards. </span>
      <span id="f0955"> He brought his daughter back with him, I was told, and she never spoke to him again. </span>
      <span id="f0956"> Oh, yes; it was a bad business. </span>
      <span id="f0957"> The girl died, too, died within a year. </span>
      <span id="f0958"> So she left a son, did she? </span>
      <span id="f0959"> I had forgotten that. </span>
      <span id="f0960"> What sort of boy is he? </span>
      <span id="f0961"> If he is like his mother, he must be a good-looking chap.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0962">&#34;He is very good-looking,&#34; assented Lord Henry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0963">&#34;I hope he will fall into proper hands,&#34; continued the old man. </span>
      <span id="f0964"> &#34;He should have a pot of money waiting for him if Kelso did the right thing by him. </span>
      <span id="f0965"> His mother had money, too. </span>
      <span id="f0966"> All the Selby property came to her, through her grandfather. </span>
      <span id="f0967"> Her grandfather hated Kelso, thought him a mean dog. </span>
      <span id="f0968"> He was, too. </span>
      <span id="f0969"> Came to Madrid once when I was there. </span>
      <span id="f0970"> Egad, I was ashamed of him. </span>
      <span id="f0971"> The Queen used to ask me about the English noble who was always quarrelling with the cabmen about their fares. </span>
      <span id="f0972"> They made quite a story of it. </span>
      <span id="f0973"> I didn&#39;t dare show my face at Court for a month. </span>
      <span id="f0974"> I hope he treated his grandson better than he did the jarvies.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0975">&#34;I don&#39;t know,&#34; answered Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f0976"> &#34;I fancy that the boy will be well off. </span>
      <span id="f0977"> He is not of age yet. </span>
      <span id="f0978"> He has Selby, I know. </span>
      <span id="f0979"> He told me so. </span>
      <span id="f0980">And ... </span>
      <span id="f0981">his mother was very beautiful?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0982">&#34;Margaret Devereux was one of the loveliest creatures I ever saw, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f0983"> What on earth induced her to behave as she did, I never could understand. </span>
      <span id="f0984"> She could have married anybody she chose. </span>
      <span id="f0985"> Carlington was mad after her. </span>
      <span id="f0986"> She was romantic, though. </span>
      <span id="f0987"> All the women of that family were. </span>
      <span id="f0988"> The men were a poor lot, but, egad! </span>
      <span id="f0989">the women were wonderful. </span>
      <span id="f0990">Carlington went on his knees to her. </span>
      <span id="f0991"> Told me so himself. </span>
      <span id="f0992"> She laughed at him, and there wasn&#39;t a girl in London at the time who wasn&#39;t after him. </span>
      <span id="f0993"> And by the way, Harry, talking about silly marriages, what is this humbug your father tells me about Dartmoor wanting to marry an American? </span>
      <span id="f0994"> Ain&#39;t English girls good enough for him?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0995">&#34;It is rather fashionable to marry Americans just now, Uncle George.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0996">&#34;I&#39;ll back English women against the world, Harry,&#34; said Lord Fermor, striking the table with his fist.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0997">&#34;The betting is on the Americans.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0998">&#34;They don&#39;t last, I am told,&#34; muttered his uncle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f0999">&#34;A long engagement exhausts them, but they are capital at a steeplechase. </span>
      <span id="f1000"> They take things flying. </span>
      <span id="f1001"> I don&#39;t think Dartmoor has a chance.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1002">&#34;Who are her people?&#34; grumbled the old gentleman. </span>
      <span id="f1003"> &#34;Has she got any?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1004">Lord Henry shook his head. </span>
      <span id="f1005"> &#34;American girls are as clever at concealing their parents, as English women are at concealing their past,&#34; he said, rising to go.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1006">&#34;They are pork-packers, I suppose?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1007">&#34;I hope so, Uncle George, for Dartmoor&#39;s sake. </span>
      <span id="f1008"> I am told that pork-packing is the most lucrative profession in America, after politics.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1009">&#34;Is she pretty?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1010">&#34;She behaves as if she was beautiful. </span>
      <span id="f1011"> Most American women do. </span>
      <span id="f1012"> It is the secret of their charm.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1013">&#34;Why can&#39;t these American women stay in their own country? </span>
      <span id="f1014"> They are always telling us that it is the paradise for women.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1015">&#34;It is. </span>
      <span id="f1016"> That is the reason why, like Eve, they are so excessively anxious to get out of it,&#34; said Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f1017"> &#34;Good-bye, Uncle George. </span>
      <span id="f1018">I shall be late for lunch, if I stop any longer. </span>
      <span id="f1019"> Thanks for giving me the information I wanted. </span>
      <span id="f1020"> I always like to know everything about my new friends, and nothing about my old ones.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1021">&#34;Where are you lunching, Harry?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1022">&#34;At Aunt Agatha&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f1023">I have asked myself and Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1024">Gray. </span>
      <span id="f1025"> He is her latest _protege_.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1026">&#34;Humph! </span>
      <span id="f1027">tell your Aunt Agatha, Harry, not to bother me any more with her charity appeals. </span>
      <span id="f1028"> I am sick of them. </span>
      <span id="f1029"> Why, the good woman thinks that I have nothing to do but to write cheques for her silly fads.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1030">&#34;All right, Uncle George, I&#39;ll tell her, but it won&#39;t have any effect. </span>
      <span id="f1031">Philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity. </span>
      <span id="f1032"> It is their distinguishing characteristic.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1033">The old gentleman growled approvingly and rang the bell for his servant. </span>
      <span id="f1034"> Lord Henry passed up the low arcade into Burlington Street and turned his steps in the direction of Berkeley Square.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1035">So that was the story of Dorian Gray&#39;s parentage. </span>
      <span id="f1036"> Crudely as it had been told to him, it had yet stirred him by its suggestion of a strange, almost modern romance. </span>
      <span id="f1037"> A beautiful woman risking everything for a mad passion. </span>
      <span id="f1038"> A few wild weeks of happiness cut short by a hideous, treacherous crime. </span>
      <span id="f1039"> Months of voiceless agony, and then a child born in pain. </span>
      <span id="f1040"> The mother snatched away by death, the boy left to solitude and the tyranny of an old and loveless man. </span>
      <span id="f1041"> Yes; it was an interesting background. </span>
      <span id="f1042"> It posed the lad, made him more perfect, as it were. </span>
      <span id="f1043"> Behind every exquisite thing that existed, there was something tragic. </span>
      <span id="f1044"> Worlds had to be in travail, that the meanest flower might blow.... </span>
      <span id="f1045">And how charming he had been at dinner the night before, as with startled eyes and lips parted in frightened pleasure he had sat opposite to him at the club, the red candleshades staining to a richer rose the wakening wonder of his face. </span>
      <span id="f1046"> Talking to him was like playing upon an exquisite violin. </span>
      <span id="f1047"> He answered to every touch and thrill of the bow.... </span>
      <span id="f1048">There was something terribly enthralling in the exercise of influence. </span>
      <span id="f1049"> No other activity was like it. </span>
      <span id="f1050"> To project one&#39;s soul into some gracious form, and let it tarry there for a moment; to hear one&#39;s own intellectual views echoed back to one with all the added music of passion and youth; to convey one&#39;s temperament into another as though it were a subtle fluid or a strange perfume: there was a real joy in that--perhaps the most satisfying joy left to us in an age so limited and vulgar as our own, an age grossly carnal in its pleasures, and grossly common in its aims.... </span>
      <span id="f1051">He was a marvellous type, too, this lad, whom by so curious a chance he had met in Basil&#39;s studio, or could be fashioned into a marvellous type, at any rate. </span>
      <span id="f1052"> Grace was his, and the white purity of boyhood, and beauty such as old Greek marbles kept for us. </span>
      <span id="f1053"> There was nothing that one could not do with him. </span>
      <span id="f1054"> He could be made a Titan or a toy. </span>
      <span id="f1055"> What a pity it was that such beauty was destined to fade! </span>
      <span id="f1056">... </span>
      <span id="f1057"> And Basil? </span>
      <span id="f1058"> From a psychological point of view, how interesting he was! </span>
      <span id="f1059"> The new manner in art, the fresh mode of looking at life, suggested so strangely by the merely visible presence of one who was unconscious of it all; the silent spirit that dwelt in dim woodland, and walked unseen in open field, suddenly showing herself, Dryadlike and not afraid, because in his soul who sought for her there had been wakened that wonderful vision to which alone are wonderful things revealed; the mere shapes and patterns of things becoming, as it were, refined, and gaining a kind of symbolical value, as though they were themselves patterns of some other and more perfect form whose shadow they made real:  how strange it all was! </span>
      <span id="f1060"> He remembered something like it in history. </span>
      <span id="f1061"> Was it not Plato, that artist in thought, who had first analyzed it? </span>
      <span id="f1062"> Was it not Buonarotti who had carved it in the coloured marbles of a sonnet-sequence? </span>
      <span id="f1063">But in our own century it was strange.... </span>
      <span id="f1064">Yes; he would try to be to Dorian Gray what, without knowing it, the lad was to the painter who had fashioned the wonderful portrait. </span>
      <span id="f1065"> He would seek to dominate him--had already, indeed, half done so. </span>
      <span id="f1066"> He would make that wonderful spirit his own. </span>
      <span id="f1067">There was something fascinating in this son of love and death.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1068">Suddenly he stopped and glanced up at the houses. </span>
      <span id="f1069"> He found that he had passed his aunt&#39;s some distance, and, smiling to himself, turned back. </span>
      <span id="f1070">When he entered the somewhat sombre hall, the butler told him that they had gone in to lunch. </span>
      <span id="f1071"> He gave one of the footmen his hat and stick and passed into the dining-room.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1072">&#34;Late as usual, Harry,&#34; cried his aunt, shaking her head at him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1073">He invented a facile excuse, and having taken the vacant seat next to her, looked round to see who was there. </span>
      <span id="f1074"> Dorian bowed to him shyly from the end of the table, a flush of pleasure stealing into his cheek. </span>
      <span id="f1075">Opposite was the Duchess of Harley, a lady of admirable good-nature and good temper, much liked by every one who knew her, and of those ample architectural proportions that in women who are not duchesses are described by contemporary historians as stoutness. </span>
      <span id="f1076"> Next to her sat, on her right, Sir Thomas Burdon, a Radical member of Parliament, who followed his leader in public life and in private life followed the best cooks, dining with the Tories and thinking with the Liberals, in accordance with a wise and well-known rule. </span>
      <span id="f1077"> The post on her left was occupied by Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1078">Erskine of Treadley, an old gentleman of considerable charm and culture, who had fallen, however, into bad habits of silence, having, as he explained once to Lady Agatha, said everything that he had to say before he was thirty. </span>
      <span id="f1079"> His own neighbour was Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1080">Vandeleur, one of his aunt&#39;s oldest friends, a perfect saint amongst women, but so dreadfully dowdy that she reminded one of a badly bound hymn-book. </span>
      <span id="f1081">Fortunately for him she had on the other side Lord Faudel, a most intelligent middle-aged mediocrity, as bald as a ministerial statement in the House of Commons, with whom she was conversing in that intensely earnest manner which is the one unpardonable error, as he remarked once himself, that all really good people fall into, and from which none of them ever quite escape.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1082">&#34;We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry,&#34; cried the duchess, nodding pleasantly to him across the table. </span>
      <span id="f1083"> &#34;Do you think he will really marry this fascinating young person?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1084">&#34;I believe she has made up her mind to propose to him, Duchess.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1085">&#34;How dreadful!&#34; exclaimed Lady Agatha. </span>
      <span id="f1086"> &#34;Really, some one should interfere.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1087">&#34;I am told, on excellent authority, that her father keeps an American dry-goods store,&#34; said Sir Thomas Burdon, looking supercilious.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1088">&#34;My uncle has already suggested pork-packing, Sir Thomas.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1089">&#34;Dry-goods! </span>
      <span id="f1090">What are American dry-goods?&#34; asked the duchess, raising her large hands in wonder and accentuating the verb.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1091">&#34;American novels,&#34; answered Lord Henry, helping himself to some quail.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1092">The duchess looked puzzled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1093">&#34;Don&#39;t mind him, my dear,&#34; whispered Lady Agatha. </span>
      <span id="f1094"> &#34;He never means anything that he says.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1095">&#34;When America was discovered,&#34; said the Radical member--and he began to give some wearisome facts. </span>
      <span id="f1096"> Like all people who try to exhaust a subject, he exhausted his listeners. </span>
      <span id="f1097"> The duchess sighed and exercised her privilege of interruption. </span>
      <span id="f1098"> &#34;I wish to goodness it never had been discovered at all!&#34; she exclaimed. </span>
      <span id="f1099"> &#34;Really, our girls have no chance nowadays. </span>
      <span id="f1100"> It is most unfair.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1101">&#34;Perhaps, after all, America never has been discovered,&#34; said Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1102">Erskine; &#34;I myself would say that it had merely been detected.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1103">&#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f1104">but I have seen specimens of the inhabitants,&#34; answered the duchess vaguely. </span>
      <span id="f1105"> &#34;I must confess that most of them are extremely pretty. </span>
      <span id="f1106"> And they dress well, too. </span>
      <span id="f1107"> They get all their dresses in Paris. </span>
      <span id="f1108"> I wish I could afford to do the same.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1109">&#34;They say that when good Americans die they go to Paris,&#34; chuckled Sir Thomas, who had a large wardrobe of Humour&#39;s cast-off clothes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1110">&#34;Really! </span>
      <span id="f1111"> And where do bad Americans go to when they die?&#34; inquired the duchess.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1112">&#34;They go to America,&#34; murmured Lord Henry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1113">Sir Thomas frowned. </span>
      <span id="f1114"> &#34;I am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced against that great country,&#34; he said to Lady Agatha. </span>
      <span id="f1115"> &#34;I have travelled all over it in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters, are extremely civil. </span>
      <span id="f1116"> I assure you that it is an education to visit it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1117">&#34;But must we really see Chicago in order to be educated?&#34; asked Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1118">Erskine plaintively. </span>
      <span id="f1119"> &#34;I don&#39;t feel up to the journey.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1120">Sir Thomas waved his hand. </span>
      <span id="f1121"> &#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1122">Erskine of Treadley has the world on his shelves. </span>
      <span id="f1123">We practical men like to see things, not to read about them. </span>
      <span id="f1124">The Americans are an extremely interesting people. </span>
      <span id="f1125">They are absolutely reasonable. </span>
      <span id="f1126">I think that is their distinguishing characteristic. </span>
      <span id="f1127">Yes, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1128">Erskine, an absolutely reasonable people. </span>
      <span id="f1129">I assure you there is no nonsense about the Americans.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1130">&#34;How dreadful!&#34; cried Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f1131"> &#34;I can stand brute force, but brute reason is quite unbearable. </span>
      <span id="f1132"> There is something unfair about its use. </span>
      <span id="f1133">It is hitting below the intellect.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1134">&#34;I do not understand you,&#34; said Sir Thomas, growing rather red.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1135">&#34;I do, Lord Henry,&#34; murmured Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1136">Erskine, with a smile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1137">&#34;Paradoxes are all very well in their way....&#34; rejoined the baronet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1138">&#34;Was that a paradox?&#34; asked Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1139">Erskine. </span>
      <span id="f1140"> &#34;I did not think so. </span>
      <span id="f1141"> Perhaps it was. </span>
      <span id="f1142"> Well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth. </span>
      <span id="f1143"> To test reality we must see it on the tight rope. </span>
      <span id="f1144"> When the verities become acrobats, we can judge them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1145">&#34;Dear me!&#34; said Lady Agatha, &#34;how you men argue! </span>
      <span id="f1146"> I am sure I never can make out what you are talking about. </span>
      <span id="f1147"> Oh! </span>
      <span id="f1148"> Harry, I am quite vexed with you. </span>
      <span id="f1149"> Why do you try to persuade our nice Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1150">Dorian Gray to give up the East End? </span>
      <span id="f1151"> I assure you he would be quite invaluable. </span>
      <span id="f1152"> They would love his playing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1153">&#34;I want him to play to me,&#34; cried Lord Henry, smiling, and he looked down the table and caught a bright answering glance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1154">&#34;But they are so unhappy in Whitechapel,&#34; continued Lady Agatha.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1155">&#34;I can sympathize with everything except suffering,&#34; said Lord Henry, shrugging his shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f1156"> &#34;I cannot sympathize with that. </span>
      <span id="f1157"> It is too ugly, too horrible, too distressing. </span>
      <span id="f1158"> There is something terribly morbid in the modern sympathy with pain. </span>
      <span id="f1159"> One should sympathize with the colour, the beauty, the joy of life. </span>
      <span id="f1160"> The less said about life&#39;s sores, the better.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1161">&#34;Still, the East End is a very important problem,&#34; remarked Sir Thomas with a grave shake of the head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1162">&#34;Quite so,&#34; answered the young lord. </span>
      <span id="f1163"> &#34;It is the problem of slavery, and we try to solve it by amusing the slaves.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1164">The politician looked at him keenly. </span>
      <span id="f1165"> &#34;What change do you propose, then?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1166">Lord Henry laughed. </span>
      <span id="f1167"> &#34;I don&#39;t desire to change anything in England except the weather,&#34; he answered. </span>
      <span id="f1168"> &#34;I am quite content with philosophic contemplation. </span>
      <span id="f1169"> But, as the nineteenth century has gone bankrupt through an over-expenditure of sympathy, I would suggest that we should appeal to science to put us straight. </span>
      <span id="f1170"> The advantage of the emotions is that they lead us astray, and the advantage of science is that it is not emotional.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1171">&#34;But we have such grave responsibilities,&#34; ventured Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1172">Vandeleur timidly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1173">&#34;Terribly grave,&#34; echoed Lady Agatha.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1174">Lord Henry looked over at Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1175">Erskine. </span>
      <span id="f1176"> &#34;Humanity takes itself too seriously. </span>
      <span id="f1177"> It is the world&#39;s original sin. </span>
      <span id="f1178"> If the caveman had known how to laugh, history would have been different.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1179">&#34;You are really very comforting,&#34; warbled the duchess. </span>
      <span id="f1180"> &#34;I have always felt rather guilty when I came to see your dear aunt, for I take no interest at all in the East End. </span>
      <span id="f1181"> For the future I shall be able to look her in the face without a blush.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1182">&#34;A blush is very becoming, Duchess,&#34; remarked Lord Henry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1183">&#34;Only when one is young,&#34; she answered. </span>
      <span id="f1184"> &#34;When an old woman like myself blushes, it is a very bad sign. </span>
      <span id="f1185"> Ah! </span>
      <span id="f1186"> Lord Henry, I wish you would tell me how to become young again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1187">He thought for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f1188"> &#34;Can you remember any great error that you committed in your early days, Duchess?&#34; he asked, looking at her across the table.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1189">&#34;A great many, I fear,&#34; she cried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1190">&#34;Then commit them over again,&#34; he said gravely. </span>
      <span id="f1191"> &#34;To get back one&#39;s youth, one has merely to repeat one&#39;s follies.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1192">&#34;A delightful theory!&#34; she exclaimed. </span>
      <span id="f1193"> &#34;I must put it into practice.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1194">&#34;A dangerous theory!&#34; came from Sir Thomas&#39;s tight lips. </span>
      <span id="f1195"> Lady Agatha shook her head, but could not help being amused. </span>
      <span id="f1196"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1197">Erskine listened.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1198">&#34;Yes,&#34; he continued, &#34;that is one of the great secrets of life. </span>
      <span id="f1199">Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, and discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are one&#39;s mistakes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1200">A laugh ran round the table.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1201">He played with the idea and grew wilful; tossed it into the air and transformed it; let it escape and recaptured it; made it iridescent with fancy and winged it with paradox. </span>
      <span id="f1202"> The praise of folly, as he went on, soared into a philosophy, and philosophy herself became young, and catching the mad music of pleasure, wearing, one might fancy, her wine-stained robe and wreath of ivy, danced like a Bacchante over the hills of life, and mocked the slow Silenus for being sober. </span>
      <span id="f1203"> Facts fled before her like frightened forest things. </span>
      <span id="f1204"> Her white feet trod the huge press at which wise Omar sits, till the seething grape-juice rose round her bare limbs in waves of purple bubbles, or crawled in red foam over the vat&#39;s black, dripping, sloping sides. </span>
      <span id="f1205"> It was an extraordinary improvisation. </span>
      <span id="f1206"> He felt that the eyes of Dorian Gray were fixed on him, and the consciousness that amongst his audience there was one whose temperament he wished to fascinate seemed to give his wit keenness and to lend colour to his imagination. </span>
      <span id="f1207"> He was brilliant, fantastic, irresponsible. </span>
      <span id="f1208"> He charmed his listeners out of themselves, and they followed his pipe, laughing. </span>
      <span id="f1209"> Dorian Gray never took his gaze off him, but sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing each other over his lips and wonder growing grave in his darkening eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1210">At last, liveried in the costume of the age, reality entered the room in the shape of a servant to tell the duchess that her carriage was waiting. </span>
      <span id="f1211"> She wrung her hands in mock despair. </span>
      <span id="f1212"> &#34;How annoying!&#34; she cried. </span>
      <span id="f1213"> &#34;I must go. </span>
      <span id="f1214"> I have to call for my husband at the club, to take him to some absurd meeting at Willis&#39;s Rooms, where he is going to be in the chair. </span>
      <span id="f1215"> If I am late he is sure to be furious, and I couldn&#39;t have a scene in this bonnet. </span>
      <span id="f1216"> It is far too fragile. </span>
      <span id="f1217"> A harsh word would ruin it. </span>
      <span id="f1218"> No, I must go, dear Agatha. </span>
      <span id="f1219"> Good-bye, Lord Henry, you are quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing. </span>
      <span id="f1220"> I am sure I don&#39;t know what to say about your views. </span>
      <span id="f1221"> You must come and dine with us some night. </span>
      <span id="f1222"> Tuesday? </span>
      <span id="f1223"> Are you disengaged Tuesday?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1224">&#34;For you I would throw over anybody, Duchess,&#34; said Lord Henry with a bow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1225">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f1226">that is very nice, and very wrong of you,&#34; she cried; &#34;so mind you come&#34;; and she swept out of the room, followed by Lady Agatha and the other ladies.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1227">When Lord Henry had sat down again, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1228">Erskine moved round, and taking a chair close to him, placed his hand upon his arm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1229">&#34;You talk books away,&#34; he said; &#34;why don&#39;t you write one?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1230">&#34;I am too fond of reading books to care to write them, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1231">Erskine. </span>
      <span id="f1232"> I should like to write a novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovely as a Persian carpet and as unreal. </span>
      <span id="f1233"> But there is no literary public in England for anything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias. </span>
      <span id="f1234">Of all people in the world the English have the least sense of the beauty of literature.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1235">&#34;I fear you are right,&#34; answered Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1236">Erskine. </span>
      <span id="f1237"> &#34;I myself used to have literary ambitions, but I gave them up long ago. </span>
      <span id="f1238"> And now, my dear young friend, if you will allow me to call you so, may I ask if you really meant all that you said to us at lunch?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1239">&#34;I quite forget what I said,&#34; smiled Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f1240"> &#34;Was it all very bad?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1241">&#34;Very bad indeed. </span>
      <span id="f1242"> In fact I consider you extremely dangerous, and if anything happens to our good duchess, we shall all look on you as being primarily responsible. </span>
      <span id="f1243"> But I should like to talk to you about life. </span>
      <span id="f1244">The generation into which I was born was tedious. </span>
      <span id="f1245"> Some day, when you are tired of London, come down to Treadley and expound to me your philosophy of pleasure over some admirable Burgundy I am fortunate enough to possess.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1246">&#34;I shall be charmed. </span>
      <span id="f1247"> A visit to Treadley would be a great privilege. </span>
      <span id="f1248">It has a perfect host, and a perfect library.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1249">&#34;You will complete it,&#34; answered the old gentleman with a courteous bow. </span>
      <span id="f1250"> &#34;And now I must bid good-bye to your excellent aunt. </span>
      <span id="f1251"> I am due at the Athenaeum. </span>
      <span id="f1252"> It is the hour when we sleep there.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1253">&#34;All of you, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1254">Erskine?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1255">&#34;Forty of us, in forty arm-chairs. </span>
      <span id="f1256">We are practising for an English Academy of Letters.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1257">Lord Henry laughed and rose. </span>
      <span id="f1258"> &#34;I am going to the park,&#34; he cried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1259">As he was passing out of the door, Dorian Gray touched him on the arm. </span>
      <span id="f1260">&#34;Let me come with you,&#34; he murmured.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1261">&#34;But I thought you had promised Basil Hallward to go and see him,&#34; answered Lord Henry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1262">&#34;I would sooner come with you; yes, I feel I must come with you. </span>
      <span id="f1263"> Do let me. </span>
      <span id="f1264"> And you will promise to talk to me all the time? </span>
      <span id="f1265"> No one talks so wonderfully as you do.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1266">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f1267"> I have talked quite enough for to-day,&#34; said Lord Henry, smiling. </span>
      <span id="f1268">&#34;All I want now is to look at life. </span>
      <span id="f1269"> You may come and look at it with me, if you care to.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>