<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1270">CHAPTER 4</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1271">One afternoon, a month later, Dorian Gray was reclining in a luxurious arm-chair, in the little library of Lord Henry&#39;s house in Mayfair. </span>
      <span id="f1272"> It was, in its way, a very charming room, with its high panelled wainscoting of olive-stained oak, its cream-coloured frieze and ceiling of raised plasterwork, and its brickdust felt carpet strewn with silk, long-fringed Persian rugs. </span>
      <span id="f1273"> On a tiny satinwood table stood a statuette by Clodion, and beside it lay a copy of Les Cent Nouvelles, bound for Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve and powdered with the gilt daisies that Queen had selected for her device. </span>
      <span id="f1274"> Some large blue china jars and parrot-tulips were ranged on the mantelshelf, and through the small leaded panes of the window streamed the apricot-coloured light of a summer day in London.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1275">Lord Henry had not yet come in. </span>
      <span id="f1276"> He was always late on principle, his principle being that punctuality is the thief of time. </span>
      <span id="f1277"> So the lad was looking rather sulky, as with listless fingers he turned over the pages of an elaborately illustrated edition of Manon Lescaut that he had found in one of the book-cases. </span>
      <span id="f1278">The formal monotonous ticking of the Louis Quatorze clock annoyed him. </span>
      <span id="f1279"> Once or twice he thought of going away.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1280">At last he heard a step outside, and the door opened. </span>
      <span id="f1281"> &#34;How late you are, Harry!&#34; he murmured.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1282">&#34;I am afraid it is not Harry, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1283">Gray,&#34; answered a shrill voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1284">He glanced quickly round and rose to his feet. </span>
      <span id="f1285"> &#34;I beg your pardon. </span>
      <span id="f1286"> I thought--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1287">&#34;You thought it was my husband. </span>
      <span id="f1288"> It is only his wife. </span>
      <span id="f1289"> You must let me introduce myself. </span>
      <span id="f1290"> I know you quite well by your photographs. </span>
      <span id="f1291"> I think my husband has got seventeen of them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1292">&#34;Not seventeen, Lady Henry?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1293">&#34;Well, eighteen, then. </span>
      <span id="f1294"> And I saw you with him the other night at the opera.&#34;  She laughed nervously as she spoke, and watched him with her vague forget-me-not eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1295"> She was a curious woman, whose dresses always looked as if they had been designed in a rage and put on in a tempest. </span>
      <span id="f1296"> She was usually in love with somebody, and, as her passion was never returned, she had kept all her illusions. </span>
      <span id="f1297"> She tried to look picturesque, but only succeeded in being untidy. </span>
      <span id="f1298"> Her name was Victoria, and she had a perfect mania for going to church.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1299">&#34;That was at Lohengrin, Lady Henry, I think?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1300">&#34;Yes; it was at dear Lohengrin. </span>
      <span id="f1301"> I like Wagner&#39;s music better than anybody&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f1302">It is so loud that one can talk the whole time without other people hearing what one says. </span>
      <span id="f1303"> That is a great advantage, don&#39;t you think so, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1304">Gray?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1305">The same nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips, and her fingers began to play with a long tortoise-shell paper-knife.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1306">Dorian smiled and shook his head:  &#34;I am afraid I don&#39;t think so, Lady Henry. </span>
      <span id="f1307"> I never talk during music--at least, during good music. </span>
      <span id="f1308"> If one hears bad music, it is one&#39;s duty to drown it in conversation.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1309">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f1310">that is one of Harry&#39;s views, isn&#39;t it, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1311">Gray? </span>
      <span id="f1312"> I always hear Harry&#39;s views from his friends. </span>
      <span id="f1313"> It is the only way I get to know of them. </span>
      <span id="f1314"> But you must not think I don&#39;t like good music. </span>
      <span id="f1315"> I adore it, but I am afraid of it. </span>
      <span id="f1316"> It makes me too romantic. </span>
      <span id="f1317"> I have simply worshipped pianists--two at a time, sometimes, Harry tells me. </span>
      <span id="f1318"> I don&#39;t know what it is about them. </span>
      <span id="f1319"> Perhaps it is that they are foreigners. </span>
      <span id="f1320"> They all are, ain&#39;t they? </span>
      <span id="f1321"> Even those that are born in England become foreigners after a time, don&#39;t they? </span>
      <span id="f1322"> It is so clever of them, and such a compliment to art. </span>
      <span id="f1323"> Makes it quite cosmopolitan, doesn&#39;t it? </span>
      <span id="f1324"> You have never been to any of my parties, have you, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1325">Gray? </span>
      <span id="f1326"> You must come. </span>
      <span id="f1327"> I can&#39;t afford orchids, but I spare no expense in foreigners. </span>
      <span id="f1328"> They make one&#39;s rooms look so picturesque. </span>
      <span id="f1329"> But here is Harry! </span>
      <span id="f1330"> Harry, I came in to look for you, to ask you something--I forget what it was--and I found Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1331">Gray here. </span>
      <span id="f1332"> We have had such a pleasant chat about music. </span>
      <span id="f1333"> We have quite the same ideas. </span>
      <span id="f1334"> No; I think our ideas are quite different. </span>
      <span id="f1335">But he has been most pleasant. </span>
      <span id="f1336"> I am so glad I&#39;ve seen him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1337">&#34;I am charmed, my love, quite charmed,&#34; said Lord Henry, elevating his dark, crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amused smile. </span>
      <span id="f1338"> &#34;So sorry I am late, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f1339"> I went to look after a piece of old brocade in Wardour Street and had to bargain for hours for it. </span>
      <span id="f1340">Nowadays people know the price of everything and the value of nothing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1341">&#34;I am afraid I must be going,&#34; exclaimed Lady Henry, breaking an awkward silence with her silly sudden laugh. </span>
      <span id="f1342"> &#34;I have promised to drive with the duchess. </span>
      <span id="f1343"> Good-bye, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1344">Gray. </span>
      <span id="f1345"> Good-bye, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f1346"> You are dining out, I suppose? </span>
      <span id="f1347"> So am I. </span>
      <span id="f1348">Perhaps I shall see you at Lady Thornbury&#39;s.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1349">&#34;I dare say, my dear,&#34; said Lord Henry, shutting the door behind her as, looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in the rain, she flitted out of the room, leaving a faint odour of frangipanni. </span>
      <span id="f1350"> Then he lit a cigarette and flung himself down on the sofa.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1351">&#34;Never marry a woman with straw-coloured hair, Dorian,&#34; he said after a few puffs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1352">&#34;Why, Harry?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1353">&#34;Because they are so sentimental.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1354">&#34;But I like sentimental people.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1355">&#34;Never marry at all, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f1356"> Men marry because they are tired; women, because they are curious:  both are disappointed.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1357">&#34;I don&#39;t think I am likely to marry, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f1358"> I am too much in love. </span>
      <span id="f1359">That is one of your aphorisms. </span>
      <span id="f1360"> I am putting it into practice, as I do everything that you say.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1361">&#34;Who are you in love with?&#34; asked Lord Henry after a pause.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1362">&#34;With an actress,&#34; said Dorian Gray, blushing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1363">Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f1364"> &#34;That is a rather commonplace _debut_.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1365">&#34;You would not say so if you saw her, Harry.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1366">&#34;Who is she?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1367">&#34;Her name is Sibyl Vane.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1368">&#34;Never heard of her.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1369">&#34;No one has. </span>
      <span id="f1370"> People will some day, however. </span>
      <span id="f1371"> She is a genius.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1372">&#34;My dear boy, no woman is a genius. </span>
      <span id="f1373"> Women are a decorative sex. </span>
      <span id="f1374"> They never have anything to say, but they say it charmingly. </span>
      <span id="f1375"> Women represent the triumph of matter over mind, just as men represent the triumph of mind over morals.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1376">&#34;Harry, how can you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1377">&#34;My dear Dorian, it is quite true. </span>
      <span id="f1378"> I am analysing women at present, so I ought to know. </span>
      <span id="f1379"> The subject is not so abstruse as I thought it was. </span>
      <span id="f1380">I find that, ultimately, there are only two kinds of women, the plain and the coloured. </span>
      <span id="f1381"> The plain women are very useful. </span>
      <span id="f1382"> If you want to gain a reputation for respectability, you have merely to take them down to supper. </span>
      <span id="f1383"> The other women are very charming. </span>
      <span id="f1384"> They commit one mistake, however. </span>
      <span id="f1385"> They paint in order to try and look young. </span>
      <span id="f1386"> Our grandmothers painted in order to try and talk brilliantly. </span>
      <span id="f1387"> _Rouge_ and _esprit_ used to go together. </span>
      <span id="f1388"> That is all over now. </span>
      <span id="f1389"> As long as a woman can look ten years younger than her own daughter, she is perfectly satisfied. </span>
      <span id="f1390"> As for conversation, there are only five women in London worth talking to, and two of these can&#39;t be admitted into decent society. </span>
      <span id="f1391"> However, tell me about your genius. </span>
      <span id="f1392"> How long have you known her?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1393">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f1394"> Harry, your views terrify me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1395">&#34;Never mind that. </span>
      <span id="f1396"> How long have you known her?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1397">&#34;About three weeks.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1398">&#34;And where did you come across her?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1399">&#34;I will tell you, Harry, but you mustn&#39;t be unsympathetic about it. </span>
      <span id="f1400">After all, it never would have happened if I had not met you. </span>
      <span id="f1401"> You filled me with a wild desire to know everything about life. </span>
      <span id="f1402"> For days after I met you, something seemed to throb in my veins. </span>
      <span id="f1403"> As I lounged in the park, or strolled down Piccadilly, I used to look at every one who passed me and wonder, with a mad curiosity, what sort of lives they led. </span>
      <span id="f1404"> Some of them fascinated me. </span>
      <span id="f1405"> Others filled me with terror. </span>
      <span id="f1406"> There was an exquisite poison in the air. </span>
      <span id="f1407"> I had a passion for sensations.... </span>
      <span id="f1408">Well, one evening about seven o&#39;clock, I determined to go out in search of some adventure. </span>
      <span id="f1409"> I felt that this grey monstrous London of ours, with its myriads of people, its sordid sinners, and its splendid sins, as you once phrased it, must have something in store for me. </span>
      <span id="f1410"> I fancied a thousand things. </span>
      <span id="f1411"> The mere danger gave me a sense of delight. </span>
      <span id="f1412"> I remembered what you had said to me on that wonderful evening when we first dined together, about the search for beauty being the real secret of life. </span>
      <span id="f1413"> I don&#39;t know what I expected, but I went out and wandered eastward, soon losing my way in a labyrinth of grimy streets and black grassless squares. </span>
      <span id="f1414"> About half-past eight I passed by an absurd little theatre, with great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills. </span>
      <span id="f1415"> A hideous Jew, in the most amazing waistcoat I ever beheld in my life, was standing at the entrance, smoking a vile cigar. </span>
      <span id="f1416"> He had greasy ringlets, and an enormous diamond blazed in the centre of a soiled shirt. </span>
      <span id="f1417">&#39;Have a box, my Lord?&#39; he said, when he saw me, and he took off his hat with an air of gorgeous servility. </span>
      <span id="f1418"> There was something about him, Harry, that amused me. </span>
      <span id="f1419"> He was such a monster. </span>
      <span id="f1420"> You will laugh at me, I know, but I really went in and paid a whole guinea for the stage-box. </span>
      <span id="f1421">To the present day I can&#39;t make out why I did so; and yet if I hadn&#39;t--my dear Harry, if I hadn&#39;t--I should have missed the greatest romance of my life. </span>
      <span id="f1422"> I see you are laughing. </span>
      <span id="f1423"> It is horrid of you!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1424">&#34;I am not laughing, Dorian; at least I am not laughing at you. </span>
      <span id="f1425"> But you should not say the greatest romance of your life. </span>
      <span id="f1426"> You should say the first romance of your life. </span>
      <span id="f1427"> You will always be loved, and you will always be in love with love. </span>
      <span id="f1428"> A _grande passion_ is the privilege of people who have nothing to do. </span>
      <span id="f1429"> That is the one use of the idle classes of a country. </span>
      <span id="f1430"> Don&#39;t be afraid. </span>
      <span id="f1431"> There are exquisite things in store for you. </span>
      <span id="f1432"> This is merely the beginning.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1433">&#34;Do you think my nature so shallow?&#34; cried Dorian Gray angrily.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1434">&#34;No; I think your nature so deep.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1435">&#34;How do you mean?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1436">&#34;My dear boy, the people who love only once in their lives are really the shallow people. </span>
      <span id="f1437"> What they call their loyalty, and their fidelity, I call either the lethargy of custom or their lack of imagination. </span>
      <span id="f1438">Faithfulness is to the emotional life what consistency is to the life of the intellect--simply a confession of failure. </span>
      <span id="f1439"> Faithfulness! </span>
      <span id="f1440"> I must analyse it some day. </span>
      <span id="f1441"> The passion for property is in it. </span>
      <span id="f1442"> There are many things that we would throw away if we were not afraid that others might pick them up. </span>
      <span id="f1443"> But I don&#39;t want to interrupt you. </span>
      <span id="f1444"> Go on with your story.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1445">&#34;Well, I found myself seated in a horrid little private box, with a vulgar drop-scene staring me in the face. </span>
      <span id="f1446"> I looked out from behind the curtain and surveyed the house. </span>
      <span id="f1447"> It was a tawdry affair, all Cupids and cornucopias, like a third-rate wedding-cake. </span>
      <span id="f1448">The gallery and pit were fairly full, but the two rows of dingy stalls were quite empty, and there was hardly a person in what I suppose they called the dress-circle. </span>
      <span id="f1449"> Women went about with oranges and ginger-beer, and there was a terrible consumption of nuts going on.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1450">&#34;It must have been just like the palmy days of the British drama.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1451">&#34;Just like, I should fancy, and very depressing. </span>
      <span id="f1452"> I began to wonder what on earth I should do when I caught sight of the play-bill. </span>
      <span id="f1453"> What do you think the play was, Harry?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1454">&#34;I should think &#39;The Idiot Boy&#39;, or &#39;Dumb but Innocent&#39;. </span>
      <span id="f1455"> Our fathers used to like that sort of piece, I believe. </span>
      <span id="f1456"> The longer I live, Dorian, the more keenly I feel that whatever was good enough for our fathers is not good enough for us. </span>
      <span id="f1457"> In art, as in politics, _les grandperes ont toujours tort_.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1458">&#34;This play was good enough for us, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f1459"> It was Romeo and Juliet. </span>
      <span id="f1460"> I must admit that I was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing Shakespeare done in such a wretched hole of a place. </span>
      <span id="f1461"> Still, I felt interested, in a sort of way. </span>
      <span id="f1462"> At any rate, I determined to wait for the first act. </span>
      <span id="f1463">There was a dreadful orchestra, presided over by a young Hebrew who sat at a cracked piano, that nearly drove me away, but at last the drop-scene was drawn up and the play began. </span>
      <span id="f1464"> Romeo was a stout elderly gentleman, with corked eyebrows, a husky tragedy voice, and a figure like a beer-barrel. </span>
      <span id="f1465">Mercutio was almost as bad. </span>
      <span id="f1466"> He was played by the low-comedian, who had introduced gags of his own and was on most friendly terms with the pit. </span>
      <span id="f1467"> They were both as grotesque as the scenery, and that looked as if it had come out of a country-booth. </span>
      <span id="f1468">But Juliet! </span>
      <span id="f1469"> Harry, imagine a girl, hardly seventeen years of age, with a little, flowerlike face, a small Greek head with plaited coils of dark-brown hair, eyes that were violet wells of passion, lips that were like the petals of a rose. </span>
      <span id="f1470"> She was the loveliest thing I had ever seen in my life. </span>
      <span id="f1471"> You said to me once that pathos left you unmoved, but that beauty, mere beauty, could fill your eyes with tears. </span>
      <span id="f1472"> I tell you, Harry, I could hardly see this girl for the mist of tears that came across me. </span>
      <span id="f1473"> And her voice--I never heard such a voice. </span>
      <span id="f1474"> It was very low at first, with deep mellow notes that seemed to fall singly upon one&#39;s ear. </span>
      <span id="f1475"> Then it became a little louder, and sounded like a flute or a distant hautboy. </span>
      <span id="f1476"> In the garden-scene it had all the tremulous ecstasy that one hears just before dawn when nightingales are singing. </span>
      <span id="f1477"> There were moments, later on, when it had the wild passion of violins. </span>
      <span id="f1478"> You know how a voice can stir one. </span>
      <span id="f1479"> Your voice and the voice of Sibyl Vane are two things that I shall never forget. </span>
      <span id="f1480"> When I close my eyes, I hear them, and each of them says something different. </span>
      <span id="f1481"> I don&#39;t know which to follow. </span>
      <span id="f1482"> Why should I not love her? </span>
      <span id="f1483"> Harry, I do love her. </span>
      <span id="f1484"> She is everything to me in life. </span>
      <span id="f1485"> Night after night I go to see her play. </span>
      <span id="f1486"> One evening she is Rosalind, and the next evening she is Imogen. </span>
      <span id="f1487"> I have seen her die in the gloom of an Italian tomb, sucking the poison from her lover&#39;s lips. </span>
      <span id="f1488"> I have watched her wandering through the forest of Arden, disguised as a pretty boy in hose and doublet and dainty cap. </span>
      <span id="f1489">She has been mad, and has come into the presence of a guilty king, and given him rue to wear and bitter herbs to taste of. </span>
      <span id="f1490"> She has been innocent, and the black hands of jealousy have crushed her reedlike throat. </span>
      <span id="f1491"> I have seen her in every age and in every costume. </span>
      <span id="f1492"> Ordinary women never appeal to one&#39;s imagination. </span>
      <span id="f1493"> They are limited to their century. </span>
      <span id="f1494"> No glamour ever transfigures them. </span>
      <span id="f1495"> One knows their minds as easily as one knows their bonnets. </span>
      <span id="f1496"> One can always find them. </span>
      <span id="f1497"> There is no mystery in any of them. </span>
      <span id="f1498"> They ride in the park in the morning and chatter at tea-parties in the afternoon. </span>
      <span id="f1499"> They have their stereotyped smile and their fashionable manner. </span>
      <span id="f1500"> They are quite obvious. </span>
      <span id="f1501"> But an actress! </span>
      <span id="f1502"> How different an actress is! </span>
      <span id="f1503"> Harry! </span>
      <span id="f1504">why didn&#39;t you tell me that the only thing worth loving is an actress?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1505">&#34;Because I have loved so many of them, Dorian.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1506">&#34;Oh, yes, horrid people with dyed hair and painted faces.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1507">&#34;Don&#39;t run down dyed hair and painted faces. </span>
      <span id="f1508"> There is an extraordinary charm in them, sometimes,&#34; said Lord Henry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1509">&#34;I wish now I had not told you about Sibyl Vane.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1510">&#34;You could not have helped telling me, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f1511"> All through your life you will tell me everything you do.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1512">&#34;Yes, Harry, I believe that is true. </span>
      <span id="f1513"> I cannot help telling you things. </span>
      <span id="f1514">You have a curious influence over me. </span>
      <span id="f1515"> If I ever did a crime, I would come and confess it to you. </span>
      <span id="f1516"> You would understand me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1517">&#34;People like you--the wilful sunbeams of life--don&#39;t commit crimes, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f1518"> But I am much obliged for the compliment, all the same. </span>
      <span id="f1519"> And now tell me--reach me the matches, like a good boy--thanks--what are your actual relations with Sibyl Vane?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1520">Dorian Gray leaped to his feet, with flushed cheeks and burning eyes. </span>
      <span id="f1521">&#34;Harry! </span>
      <span id="f1522"> Sibyl Vane is sacred!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1523">&#34;It is only the sacred things that are worth touching, Dorian,&#34; said Lord Henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice. </span>
      <span id="f1524"> &#34;But why should you be annoyed? </span>
      <span id="f1525"> I suppose she will belong to you some day. </span>
      <span id="f1526">When one is in love, one always begins by deceiving one&#39;s self, and one always ends by deceiving others. </span>
      <span id="f1527"> That is what the world calls a romance. </span>
      <span id="f1528"> You know her, at any rate, I suppose?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1529">&#34;Of course I know her. </span>
      <span id="f1530"> On the first night I was at the theatre, the horrid old Jew came round to the box after the performance was over and offered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to her. </span>
      <span id="f1531"> I was furious with him, and told him that Juliet had been dead for hundreds of years and that her body was lying in a marble tomb in Verona. </span>
      <span id="f1532"> I think, from his blank look of amazement, that he was under the impression that I had taken too much champagne, or something.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1533">&#34;I am not surprised.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1534">&#34;Then he asked me if I wrote for any of the newspapers. </span>
      <span id="f1535"> I told him I never even read them. </span>
      <span id="f1536"> He seemed terribly disappointed at that, and confided to me that all the dramatic critics were in a conspiracy against him, and that they were every one of them to be bought.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1537">&#34;I should not wonder if he was quite right there. </span>
      <span id="f1538"> But, on the other hand, judging from their appearance, most of them cannot be at all expensive.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1539">&#34;Well, he seemed to think they were beyond his means,&#34; laughed Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f1540">&#34;By this time, however, the lights were being put out in the theatre, and I had to go. </span>
      <span id="f1541"> He wanted me to try some cigars that he strongly recommended. </span>
      <span id="f1542"> I declined. </span>
      <span id="f1543"> The next night, of course, I arrived at the place again. </span>
      <span id="f1544"> When he saw me, he made me a low bow and assured me that I was a munificent patron of art. </span>
      <span id="f1545"> He was a most offensive brute, though he had an extraordinary passion for Shakespeare. </span>
      <span id="f1546"> He told me once, with an air of pride, that his five bankruptcies were entirely due to &#39;The Bard,&#39; as he insisted on calling him. </span>
      <span id="f1547"> He seemed to think it a distinction.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1548">&#34;It was a distinction, my dear Dorian--a great distinction. </span>
      <span id="f1549"> Most people become bankrupt through having invested too heavily in the prose of life. </span>
      <span id="f1550"> To have ruined one&#39;s self over poetry is an honour. </span>
      <span id="f1551"> But when did you first speak to Miss Sibyl Vane?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1552">&#34;The third night. </span>
      <span id="f1553"> She had been playing Rosalind. </span>
      <span id="f1554"> I could not help going round. </span>
      <span id="f1555"> I had thrown her some flowers, and she had looked at me--at least I fancied that she had. </span>
      <span id="f1556"> The old Jew was persistent. </span>
      <span id="f1557"> He seemed determined to take me behind, so I consented. </span>
      <span id="f1558"> It was curious my not wanting to know her, wasn&#39;t it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1559">&#34;No; I don&#39;t think so.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1560">&#34;My dear Harry, why?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1561">&#34;I will tell you some other time. </span>
      <span id="f1562"> Now I want to know about the girl.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1563">&#34;Sibyl? </span>
      <span id="f1564"> Oh, she was so shy and so gentle. </span>
      <span id="f1565"> There is something of a child about her. </span>
      <span id="f1566"> Her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when I told her what I thought of her performance, and she seemed quite unconscious of her power. </span>
      <span id="f1567"> I think we were both rather nervous. </span>
      <span id="f1568"> The old Jew stood grinning at the doorway of the dusty greenroom, making elaborate speeches about us both, while we stood looking at each other like children. </span>
      <span id="f1569"> He would insist on calling me &#39;My Lord,&#39; so I had to assure Sibyl that I was not anything of the kind. </span>
      <span id="f1570"> She said quite simply to me, &#39;You look more like a prince. </span>
      <span id="f1571"> I must call you Prince Charming.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1572">&#34;Upon my word, Dorian, Miss Sibyl knows how to pay compliments.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1573">&#34;You don&#39;t understand her, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f1574"> She regarded me merely as a person in a play. </span>
      <span id="f1575"> She knows nothing of life. </span>
      <span id="f1576"> She lives with her mother, a faded tired woman who played Lady Capulet in a sort of magenta dressing-wrapper on the first night, and looks as if she had seen better days.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1577">&#34;I know that look. </span>
      <span id="f1578"> It depresses me,&#34; murmured Lord Henry, examining his rings.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1579">&#34;The Jew wanted to tell me her history, but I said it did not interest me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1580">&#34;You were quite right. </span>
      <span id="f1581"> There is always something infinitely mean about other people&#39;s tragedies.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1582">&#34;Sibyl is the only thing I care about. </span>
      <span id="f1583"> What is it to me where she came from? </span>
      <span id="f1584"> From her little head to her little feet, she is absolutely and entirely divine. </span>
      <span id="f1585"> Every night of my life I go to see her act, and every night she is more marvellous.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1586">&#34;That is the reason, I suppose, that you never dine with me now. </span>
      <span id="f1587"> I thought you must have some curious romance on hand. </span>
      <span id="f1588"> You have; but it is not quite what I expected.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1589">&#34;My dear Harry, we either lunch or sup together every day, and I have been to the opera with you several times,&#34; said Dorian, opening his blue eyes in wonder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1590">&#34;You always come dreadfully late.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1591">&#34;Well, I can&#39;t help going to see Sibyl play,&#34; he cried, &#34;even if it is only for a single act. </span>
      <span id="f1592"> I get hungry for her presence; and when I think of the wonderful soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body, I am filled with awe.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1593">&#34;You can dine with me to-night, Dorian, can&#39;t you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1594">He shook his head. </span>
      <span id="f1595"> &#34;To-night she is Imogen,&#34; he answered, &#34;and to-morrow night she will be Juliet.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1596">&#34;When is she Sibyl Vane?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1597">&#34;Never.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1598">&#34;I congratulate you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1599">&#34;How horrid you are! </span>
      <span id="f1600"> She is all the great heroines of the world in one. </span>
      <span id="f1601"> She is more than an individual. </span>
      <span id="f1602"> You laugh, but I tell you she has genius. </span>
      <span id="f1603"> I love her, and I must make her love me. </span>
      <span id="f1604"> You, who know all the secrets of life, tell me how to charm Sibyl Vane to love me! </span>
      <span id="f1605"> I want to make Romeo jealous. </span>
      <span id="f1606"> I want the dead lovers of the world to hear our laughter and grow sad. </span>
      <span id="f1607"> I want a breath of our passion to stir their dust into consciousness, to wake their ashes into pain. </span>
      <span id="f1608"> My God, Harry, how I worship her!&#34;  He was walking up and down the room as he spoke. </span>
      <span id="f1609"> Hectic spots of red burned on his cheeks. </span>
      <span id="f1610"> He was terribly excited.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1611">Lord Henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f1612"> How different he was now from the shy frightened boy he had met in Basil Hallward&#39;s studio! </span>
      <span id="f1613"> His nature had developed like a flower, had borne blossoms of scarlet flame. </span>
      <span id="f1614"> Out of its secret hiding-place had crept his soul, and desire had come to meet it on the way.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1615">&#34;And what do you propose to do?&#34; said Lord Henry at last.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1616">&#34;I want you and Basil to come with me some night and see her act. </span>
      <span id="f1617"> I have not the slightest fear of the result. </span>
      <span id="f1618"> You are certain to acknowledge her genius. </span>
      <span id="f1619"> Then we must get her out of the Jew&#39;s hands. </span>
      <span id="f1620">She is bound to him for three years--at least for two years and eight months--from the present time. </span>
      <span id="f1621"> I shall have to pay him something, of course. </span>
      <span id="f1622"> When all that is settled, I shall take a West End theatre and bring her out properly. </span>
      <span id="f1623"> She will make the world as mad as she has made me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1624">&#34;That would be impossible, my dear boy.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1625">&#34;Yes, she will. </span>
      <span id="f1626"> She has not merely art, consummate art-instinct, in her, but she has personality also; and you have often told me that it is personalities, not principles, that move the age.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1627">&#34;Well, what night shall we go?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1628">&#34;Let me see. </span>
      <span id="f1629"> To-day is Tuesday. </span>
      <span id="f1630"> Let us fix to-morrow. </span>
      <span id="f1631">She plays Juliet to-morrow.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1632">&#34;All right. </span>
      <span id="f1633"> The Bristol at eight o&#39;clock; and I will get Basil.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1634">&#34;Not eight, Harry, please. </span>
      <span id="f1635"> Half-past six. </span>
      <span id="f1636"> We must be there before the curtain rises. </span>
      <span id="f1637"> You must see her in the first act, where she meets Romeo.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1638">&#34;Half-past six! </span>
      <span id="f1639"> What an hour! </span>
      <span id="f1640"> It will be like having a meat-tea, or reading an English novel. </span>
      <span id="f1641"> It must be seven. </span>
      <span id="f1642"> No gentleman dines before seven. </span>
      <span id="f1643"> Shall you see Basil between this and then? </span>
      <span id="f1644"> Or shall I write to him?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1645">&#34;Dear Basil! </span>
      <span id="f1646"> I have not laid eyes on him for a week. </span>
      <span id="f1647"> It is rather horrid of me, as he has sent me my portrait in the most wonderful frame, specially designed by himself, and, though I am a little jealous of the picture for being a whole month younger than I am, I must admit that I delight in it. </span>
      <span id="f1648"> Perhaps you had better write to him. </span>
      <span id="f1649"> I don&#39;t want to see him alone. </span>
      <span id="f1650"> He says things that annoy me. </span>
      <span id="f1651"> He gives me good advice.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1652">Lord Henry smiled. </span>
      <span id="f1653"> &#34;People are very fond of giving away what they need most themselves. </span>
      <span id="f1654"> It is what I call the depth of generosity.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1655">&#34;Oh, Basil is the best of fellows, but he seems to me to be just a bit of a Philistine. </span>
      <span id="f1656"> Since I have known you, Harry, I have discovered that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1657">&#34;Basil, my dear boy, puts everything that is charming in him into his work. </span>
      <span id="f1658"> The consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his prejudices, his principles, and his common sense. </span>
      <span id="f1659"> The only artists I have ever known who are personally delightful are bad artists. </span>
      <span id="f1660"> Good artists exist simply in what they make, and consequently are perfectly uninteresting in what they are. </span>
      <span id="f1661"> A great poet, a really great poet, is the most unpoetical of all creatures. </span>
      <span id="f1662"> But inferior poets are absolutely fascinating. </span>
      <span id="f1663"> The worse their rhymes are, the more picturesque they look. </span>
      <span id="f1664"> The mere fact of having published a book of second-rate sonnets makes a man quite irresistible. </span>
      <span id="f1665"> He lives the poetry that he cannot write. </span>
      <span id="f1666"> The others write the poetry that they dare not realize.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1667">&#34;I wonder is that really so, Harry?&#34; said Dorian Gray, putting some perfume on his handkerchief out of a large, gold-topped bottle that stood on the table. </span>
      <span id="f1668"> &#34;It must be, if you say it. </span>
      <span id="f1669"> And now I am off. </span>
      <span id="f1670">Imogen is waiting for me. </span>
      <span id="f1671"> Don&#39;t forget about to-morrow. </span>
      <span id="f1672">Good-bye.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1673">As he left the room, Lord Henry&#39;s heavy eyelids drooped, and he began to think. </span>
      <span id="f1674"> Certainly few people had ever interested him so much as Dorian Gray, and yet the lad&#39;s mad adoration of some one else caused him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy. </span>
      <span id="f1675"> He was pleased by it. </span>
      <span id="f1676"> It made him a more interesting study. </span>
      <span id="f1677"> He had been always enthralled by the methods of natural science, but the ordinary subject-matter of that science had seemed to him trivial and of no import. </span>
      <span id="f1678"> And so he had begun by vivisecting himself, as he had ended by vivisecting others. </span>
      <span id="f1679"> Human life--that appeared to him the one thing worth investigating. </span>
      <span id="f1680"> Compared to it there was nothing else of any value. </span>
      <span id="f1681"> It was true that as one watched life in its curious crucible of pain and pleasure, one could not wear over one&#39;s face a mask of glass, nor keep the sulphurous fumes from troubling the brain and making the imagination turbid with monstrous fancies and misshapen dreams. </span>
      <span id="f1682"> There were poisons so subtle that to know their properties one had to sicken of them. </span>
      <span id="f1683"> There were maladies so strange that one had to pass through them if one sought to understand their nature. </span>
      <span id="f1684"> And, yet, what a great reward one received! </span>
      <span id="f1685"> How wonderful the whole world became to one! </span>
      <span id="f1686"> To note the curious hard logic of passion, and the emotional coloured life of the intellect--to observe where they met, and where they separated, at what point they were in unison, and at what point they were at discord--there was a delight in that! </span>
      <span id="f1687"> What matter what the cost was? </span>
      <span id="f1688">One could never pay too high a price for any sensation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1689">He was conscious--and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into his brown agate eyes--that it was through certain words of his, musical words said with musical utterance, that Dorian Gray&#39;s soul had turned to this white girl and bowed in worship before her. </span>
      <span id="f1690"> To a large extent the lad was his own creation. </span>
      <span id="f1691"> He had made him premature. </span>
      <span id="f1692"> That was something. </span>
      <span id="f1693"> Ordinary people waited till life disclosed to them its secrets, but to the few, to the elect, the mysteries of life were revealed before the veil was drawn away. </span>
      <span id="f1694"> Sometimes this was the effect of art, and chiefly of the art of literature, which dealt immediately with the passions and the intellect. </span>
      <span id="f1695"> But now and then a complex personality took the place and assumed the office of art, was indeed, in its way, a real work of art, life having its elaborate masterpieces, just as poetry has, or sculpture, or painting.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1696">Yes, the lad was premature. </span>
      <span id="f1697"> He was gathering his harvest while it was yet spring. </span>
      <span id="f1698"> The pulse and passion of youth were in him, but he was becoming self-conscious. </span>
      <span id="f1699">It was delightful to watch him. </span>
      <span id="f1700"> With his beautiful face, and his beautiful soul, he was a thing to wonder at. </span>
      <span id="f1701">It was no matter how it all ended, or was destined to end. </span>
      <span id="f1702"> He was like one of those gracious figures in a pageant or a play, whose joys seem to be remote from one, but whose sorrows stir one&#39;s sense of beauty, and whose wounds are like red roses.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1703">Soul and body, body and soul--how mysterious they were! </span>
      <span id="f1704"> There was animalism in the soul, and the body had its moments of spirituality. </span>
      <span id="f1705">The senses could refine, and the intellect could degrade. </span>
      <span id="f1706"> Who could say where the fleshly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse began? </span>
      <span id="f1707">How shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists! </span>
      <span id="f1708">And yet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various schools! </span>
      <span id="f1709"> Was the soul a shadow seated in the house of sin? </span>
      <span id="f1710"> Or was the body really in the soul, as Giordano Bruno thought? </span>
      <span id="f1711"> The separation of spirit from matter was a mystery, and the union of spirit with matter was a mystery also.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1712">He began to wonder whether we could ever make psychology so absolute a science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us. </span>
      <span id="f1713"> As it was, we always misunderstood ourselves and rarely understood others. </span>
      <span id="f1714">Experience was of no ethical value. </span>
      <span id="f1715"> It was merely the name men gave to their mistakes. </span>
      <span id="f1716"> Moralists had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of warning, had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation of character, had praised it as something that taught us what to follow and showed us what to avoid. </span>
      <span id="f1717"> But there was no motive power in experience. </span>
      <span id="f1718"> It was as little of an active cause as conscience itself. </span>
      <span id="f1719">All that it really demonstrated was that our future would be the same as our past, and that the sin we had done once, and with loathing, we would do many times, and with joy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1720">It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions; and certainly Dorian Gray was a subject made to his hand, and seemed to promise rich and fruitful results. </span>
      <span id="f1721"> His sudden mad love for Sibyl Vane was a psychological phenomenon of no small interest. </span>
      <span id="f1722"> There was no doubt that curiosity had much to do with it, curiosity and the desire for new experiences, yet it was not a simple, but rather a very complex passion. </span>
      <span id="f1723"> What there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of boyhood had been transformed by the workings of the imagination, changed into something that seemed to the lad himself to be remote from sense, and was for that very reason all the more dangerous. </span>
      <span id="f1724"> It was the passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized most strongly over us. </span>
      <span id="f1725"> Our weakest motives were those of whose nature we were conscious. </span>
      <span id="f1726"> It often happened that when we thought we were experimenting on others we were really experimenting on ourselves.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1727">While Lord Henry sat dreaming on these things, a knock came to the door, and his valet entered and reminded him it was time to dress for dinner. </span>
      <span id="f1728"> He got up and looked out into the street. </span>
      <span id="f1729"> The sunset had smitten into scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite. </span>
      <span id="f1730">The panes glowed like plates of heated metal. </span>
      <span id="f1731"> The sky above was like a faded rose. </span>
      <span id="f1732"> He thought of his friend&#39;s young fiery-coloured life and wondered how it was all going to end.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1733">When he arrived home, about half-past twelve o&#39;clock, he saw a telegram lying on the hall table. </span>
      <span id="f1734"> He opened it and found it was from Dorian Gray. </span>
      <span id="f1735"> It was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to Sibyl Vane.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>