<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER 5</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f1736">CHAPTER 5</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f1737">&#34;Mother, Mother, I am so happy!&#34; whispered the girl, burying her face in the lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, with back turned to the shrill intrusive light, was sitting in the one arm-chair that their dingy sitting-room contained. </span>
      <span id="f1738"> &#34;I am so happy!&#34; she repeated, &#34;and you must be happy, too!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1739">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1740">Vane winced and put her thin, bismuth-whitened hands on her daughter&#39;s head. </span>
      <span id="f1741"> &#34;Happy!&#34; she echoed, &#34;I am only happy, Sibyl, when I see you act. </span>
      <span id="f1742"> You must not think of anything but your acting. </span>
      <span id="f1743"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1744">Isaacs has been very good to us, and we owe him money.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1745">The girl looked up and pouted. </span>
      <span id="f1746"> &#34;Money, Mother?&#34; she cried, &#34;what does money matter? </span>
      <span id="f1747"> Love is more than money.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1748">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1749">Isaacs has advanced us fifty pounds to pay off our debts and to get a proper outfit for James. </span>
      <span id="f1750"> You must not forget that, Sibyl. </span>
      <span id="f1751"> Fifty pounds is a very large sum. </span>
      <span id="f1752"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1753">Isaacs has been most considerate.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1754">&#34;He is not a gentleman, Mother, and I hate the way he talks to me,&#34; said the girl, rising to her feet and going over to the window.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1755">&#34;I don&#39;t know how we could manage without him,&#34; answered the elder woman querulously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1756">Sibyl Vane tossed her head and laughed. </span>
      <span id="f1757"> &#34;We don&#39;t want him any more, Mother. </span>
      <span id="f1758"> Prince Charming rules life for us now.&#34; Then she paused. </span>
      <span id="f1759"> A rose shook in her blood and shadowed her cheeks. </span>
      <span id="f1760"> Quick breath parted the petals of her lips. </span>
      <span id="f1761"> They trembled. </span>
      <span id="f1762"> Some southern wind of passion swept over her and stirred the dainty folds of her dress. </span>
      <span id="f1763"> &#34;I love him,&#34; she said simply.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1764">&#34;Foolish child! </span>
      <span id="f1765">foolish child!&#34; was the parrot-phrase flung in answer. </span>
      <span id="f1766">The waving of crooked, false-jewelled fingers gave grotesqueness to the words.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1767">The girl laughed again. </span>
      <span id="f1768"> The joy of a caged bird was in her voice. </span>
      <span id="f1769"> Her eyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance, then closed for a moment, as though to hide their secret. </span>
      <span id="f1770"> When they opened, the mist of a dream had passed across them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1771">Thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair, hinted at prudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes the name of common sense. </span>
      <span id="f1772"> She did not listen. </span>
      <span id="f1773"> She was free in her prison of passion. </span>
      <span id="f1774"> Her prince, Prince Charming, was with her. </span>
      <span id="f1775"> She had called on memory to remake him. </span>
      <span id="f1776"> She had sent her soul to search for him, and it had brought him back. </span>
      <span id="f1777"> His kiss burned again upon her mouth. </span>
      <span id="f1778"> Her eyelids were warm with his breath.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1779">Then wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery. </span>
      <span id="f1780"> This young man might be rich. </span>
      <span id="f1781"> If so, marriage should be thought of. </span>
      <span id="f1782">Against the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly cunning. </span>
      <span id="f1783"> The arrows of craft shot by her. </span>
      <span id="f1784"> She saw the thin lips moving, and smiled.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1785">Suddenly she felt the need to speak. </span>
      <span id="f1786"> The wordy silence troubled her. </span>
      <span id="f1787">&#34;Mother, Mother,&#34; she cried, &#34;why does he love me so much? </span>
      <span id="f1788"> I know why I love him. </span>
      <span id="f1789"> I love him because he is like what love himself should be. </span>
      <span id="f1790">But what does he see in me? </span>
      <span id="f1791"> I am not worthy of him. </span>
      <span id="f1792"> And yet--why, I cannot tell--though I feel so much beneath him, I don&#39;t feel humble. </span>
      <span id="f1793"> I feel proud, terribly proud. </span>
      <span id="f1794"> Mother, did you love my father as I love Prince Charming?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1795">The elder woman grew pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed her cheeks, and her dry lips twitched with a spasm of pain. </span>
      <span id="f1796"> Sybil rushed to her, flung her arms round her neck, and kissed her. </span>
      <span id="f1797"> &#34;Forgive me, Mother. </span>
      <span id="f1798"> I know it pains you to talk about our father. </span>
      <span id="f1799"> But it only pains you because you loved him so much. </span>
      <span id="f1800"> Don&#39;t look so sad. </span>
      <span id="f1801"> I am as happy to-day as you were twenty years ago. </span>
      <span id="f1802"> Ah! </span>
      <span id="f1803">let me be happy for ever!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1804">&#34;My child, you are far too young to think of falling in love. </span>
      <span id="f1805"> Besides, what do you know of this young man? </span>
      <span id="f1806"> You don&#39;t even know his name. </span>
      <span id="f1807"> The whole thing is most inconvenient, and really, when James is going away to Australia, and I have so much to think of, I must say that you should have shown more consideration. </span>
      <span id="f1808"> However, as I said before, if he is rich ...&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1809">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f1810"> Mother, Mother, let me be happy!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1811">Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1812">Vane glanced at her, and with one of those false theatrical gestures that so often become a mode of second nature to a stage-player, clasped her in her arms. </span>
      <span id="f1813"> At this moment, the door opened and a young lad with rough brown hair came into the room. </span>
      <span id="f1814"> He was thick-set of figure, and his hands and feet were large and somewhat clumsy in movement. </span>
      <span id="f1815"> He was not so finely bred as his sister. </span>
      <span id="f1816"> One would hardly have guessed the close relationship that existed between them. </span>
      <span id="f1817"> Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1818">Vane fixed her eyes on him and intensified her smile. </span>
      <span id="f1819"> She mentally elevated her son to the dignity of an audience. </span>
      <span id="f1820"> She felt sure that the _tableau_ was interesting.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1821">&#34;You might keep some of your kisses for me, Sibyl, I think,&#34; said the lad with a good-natured grumble.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1822">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f1823">but you don&#39;t like being kissed, Jim,&#34; she cried. </span>
      <span id="f1824"> &#34;You are a dreadful old bear.&#34;  And she ran across the room and hugged him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1825">James Vane looked into his sister&#39;s face with tenderness. </span>
      <span id="f1826"> &#34;I want you to come out with me for a walk, Sibyl. </span>
      <span id="f1827"> I don&#39;t suppose I shall ever see this horrid London again. </span>
      <span id="f1828"> I am sure I don&#39;t want to.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1829">&#34;My son, don&#39;t say such dreadful things,&#34; murmured Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1830">Vane, taking up a tawdry theatrical dress, with a sigh, and beginning to patch it. </span>
      <span id="f1831"> She felt a little disappointed that he had not joined the group. </span>
      <span id="f1832"> It would have increased the theatrical picturesqueness of the situation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1833">&#34;Why not, Mother? </span>
      <span id="f1834"> I mean it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1835">&#34;You pain me, my son. </span>
      <span id="f1836"> I trust you will return from Australia in a position of affluence. </span>
      <span id="f1837"> I believe there is no society of any kind in the Colonies--nothing that I would call society--so when you have made your fortune, you must come back and assert yourself in London.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1838">&#34;Society!&#34; muttered the lad. </span>
      <span id="f1839"> &#34;I don&#39;t want to know anything about that. </span>
      <span id="f1840"> I should like to make some money to take you and Sibyl off the stage. </span>
      <span id="f1841"> I hate it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1842">&#34;Oh, Jim!&#34; said Sibyl, laughing, &#34;how unkind of you! </span>
      <span id="f1843"> But are you really going for a walk with me? </span>
      <span id="f1844"> That will be nice! </span>
      <span id="f1845"> I was afraid you were going to say good-bye to some of your friends--to Tom Hardy, who gave you that hideous pipe, or Ned Langton, who makes fun of you for smoking it. </span>
      <span id="f1846"> It is very sweet of you to let me have your last afternoon. </span>
      <span id="f1847"> Where shall we go? </span>
      <span id="f1848"> Let us go to the park.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1849">&#34;I am too shabby,&#34; he answered, frowning. </span>
      <span id="f1850"> &#34;Only swell people go to the park.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1851">&#34;Nonsense, Jim,&#34; she whispered, stroking the sleeve of his coat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1852">He hesitated for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f1853"> &#34;Very well,&#34; he said at last, &#34;but don&#39;t be too long dressing.&#34;  She danced out of the door. </span>
      <span id="f1854"> One could hear her singing as she ran upstairs. </span>
      <span id="f1855"> Her little feet pattered overhead.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1856">He walked up and down the room two or three times. </span>
      <span id="f1857"> Then he turned to the still figure in the chair. </span>
      <span id="f1858"> &#34;Mother, are my things ready?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1859">&#34;Quite ready, James,&#34; she answered, keeping her eyes on her work. </span>
      <span id="f1860"> For some months past she had felt ill at ease when she was alone with this rough stern son of hers. </span>
      <span id="f1861"> Her shallow secret nature was troubled when their eyes met. </span>
      <span id="f1862"> She used to wonder if he suspected anything. </span>
      <span id="f1863"> The silence, for he made no other observation, became intolerable to her. </span>
      <span id="f1864">She began to complain. </span>
      <span id="f1865"> Women defend themselves by attacking, just as they attack by sudden and strange surrenders. </span>
      <span id="f1866"> &#34;I hope you will be contented, James, with your sea-faring life,&#34; she said. </span>
      <span id="f1867"> &#34;You must remember that it is your own choice. </span>
      <span id="f1868"> You might have entered a solicitor&#39;s office. </span>
      <span id="f1869"> Solicitors are a very respectable class, and in the country often dine with the best families.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1870">&#34;I hate offices, and I hate clerks,&#34; he replied. </span>
      <span id="f1871"> &#34;But you are quite right. </span>
      <span id="f1872"> I have chosen my own life. </span>
      <span id="f1873"> All I say is, watch over Sibyl. </span>
      <span id="f1874">Don&#39;t let her come to any harm. </span>
      <span id="f1875"> Mother, you must watch over her.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1876">&#34;James, you really talk very strangely. </span>
      <span id="f1877"> Of course I watch over Sibyl.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1878">&#34;I hear a gentleman comes every night to the theatre and goes behind to talk to her. </span>
      <span id="f1879"> Is that right? </span>
      <span id="f1880"> What about that?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1881">&#34;You are speaking about things you don&#39;t understand, James. </span>
      <span id="f1882"> In the profession we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most gratifying attention. </span>
      <span id="f1883"> I myself used to receive many bouquets at one time. </span>
      <span id="f1884"> That was when acting was really understood. </span>
      <span id="f1885"> As for Sibyl, I do not know at present whether her attachment is serious or not. </span>
      <span id="f1886"> But there is no doubt that the young man in question is a perfect gentleman. </span>
      <span id="f1887"> He is always most polite to me. </span>
      <span id="f1888"> Besides, he has the appearance of being rich, and the flowers he sends are lovely.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1889">&#34;You don&#39;t know his name, though,&#34; said the lad harshly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1890">&#34;No,&#34; answered his mother with a placid expression in her face. </span>
      <span id="f1891"> &#34;He has not yet revealed his real name. </span>
      <span id="f1892"> I think it is quite romantic of him. </span>
      <span id="f1893"> He is probably a member of the aristocracy.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1894">James Vane bit his lip. </span>
      <span id="f1895"> &#34;Watch over Sibyl, Mother,&#34; he cried, &#34;watch over her.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1896">&#34;My son, you distress me very much. </span>
      <span id="f1897"> Sibyl is always under my special care. </span>
      <span id="f1898"> Of course, if this gentleman is wealthy, there is no reason why she should not contract an alliance with him. </span>
      <span id="f1899"> I trust he is one of the aristocracy. </span>
      <span id="f1900"> He has all the appearance of it, I must say. </span>
      <span id="f1901"> It might be a most brilliant marriage for Sibyl. </span>
      <span id="f1902"> They would make a charming couple. </span>
      <span id="f1903"> His good looks are really quite remarkable; everybody notices them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1904">The lad muttered something to himself and drummed on the window-pane with his coarse fingers. </span>
      <span id="f1905"> He had just turned round to say something when the door opened and Sibyl ran in.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1906">&#34;How serious you both are!&#34; she cried. </span>
      <span id="f1907"> &#34;What is the matter?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1908">&#34;Nothing,&#34; he answered. </span>
      <span id="f1909"> &#34;I suppose one must be serious sometimes. </span>
      <span id="f1910">Good-bye, Mother; I will have my dinner at five o&#39;clock. </span>
      <span id="f1911">Everything is packed, except my shirts, so you need not trouble.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1912">&#34;Good-bye, my son,&#34; she answered with a bow of strained stateliness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1913">She was extremely annoyed at the tone he had adopted with her, and there was something in his look that had made her feel afraid.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1914">&#34;Kiss me, Mother,&#34; said the girl. </span>
      <span id="f1915"> Her flowerlike lips touched the withered cheek and warmed its frost.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1916">&#34;My child! </span>
      <span id="f1917">my child!&#34; cried Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f1918">Vane, looking up to the ceiling in search of an imaginary gallery.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1919">&#34;Come, Sibyl,&#34; said her brother impatiently. </span>
      <span id="f1920"> He hated his mother&#39;s affectations.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1921">They went out into the flickering, wind-blown sunlight and strolled down the dreary Euston Road. </span>
      <span id="f1922"> The passersby glanced in wonder at the sullen heavy youth who, in coarse, ill-fitting clothes, was in the company of such a graceful, refined-looking girl. </span>
      <span id="f1923"> He was like a common gardener walking with a rose.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1924">Jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive glance of some stranger. </span>
      <span id="f1925"> He had that dislike of being stared at, which comes on geniuses late in life and never leaves the commonplace. </span>
      <span id="f1926"> Sibyl, however, was quite unconscious of the effect she was producing. </span>
      <span id="f1927"> Her love was trembling in laughter on her lips. </span>
      <span id="f1928"> She was thinking of Prince Charming, and, that she might think of him all the more, she did not talk of him, but prattled on about the ship in which Jim was going to sail, about the gold he was certain to find, about the wonderful heiress whose life he was to save from the wicked, red-shirted bushrangers. </span>
      <span id="f1929"> For he was not to remain a sailor, or a supercargo, or whatever he was going to be. </span>
      <span id="f1930"> Oh, no! </span>
      <span id="f1931"> A sailor&#39;s existence was dreadful. </span>
      <span id="f1932"> Fancy being cooped up in a horrid ship, with the hoarse, hump-backed waves trying to get in, and a black wind blowing the masts down and tearing the sails into long screaming ribands! </span>
      <span id="f1933"> He was to leave the vessel at Melbourne, bid a polite good-bye to the captain, and go off at once to the gold-fields. </span>
      <span id="f1934">Before a week was over he was to come across a large nugget of pure gold, the largest nugget that had ever been discovered, and bring it down to the coast in a waggon guarded by six mounted policemen. </span>
      <span id="f1935"> The bushrangers were to attack them three times, and be defeated with immense slaughter. </span>
      <span id="f1936"> Or, no. </span>
      <span id="f1937"> He was not to go to the gold-fields at all. </span>
      <span id="f1938"> They were horrid places, where men got intoxicated, and shot each other in bar-rooms, and used bad language. </span>
      <span id="f1939"> He was to be a nice sheep-farmer, and one evening, as he was riding home, he was to see the beautiful heiress being carried off by a robber on a black horse, and give chase, and rescue her. </span>
      <span id="f1940"> Of course, she would fall in love with him, and he with her, and they would get married, and come home, and live in an immense house in London. </span>
      <span id="f1941"> Yes, there were delightful things in store for him. </span>
      <span id="f1942"> But he must be very good, and not lose his temper, or spend his money foolishly. </span>
      <span id="f1943"> She was only a year older than he was, but she knew so much more of life. </span>
      <span id="f1944"> He must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, and to say his prayers each night before he went to sleep. </span>
      <span id="f1945"> God was very good, and would watch over him. </span>
      <span id="f1946"> She would pray for him, too, and in a few years he would come back quite rich and happy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1947">The lad listened sulkily to her and made no answer. </span>
      <span id="f1948"> He was heart-sick at leaving home.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1949">Yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose. </span>
      <span id="f1950">Inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense of the danger of Sibyl&#39;s position. </span>
      <span id="f1951"> This young dandy who was making love to her could mean her no good. </span>
      <span id="f1952"> He was a gentleman, and he hated him for that, hated him through some curious race-instinct for which he could not account, and which for that reason was all the more dominant within him. </span>
      <span id="f1953"> He was conscious also of the shallowness and vanity of his mother&#39;s nature, and in that saw infinite peril for Sibyl and Sibyl&#39;s happiness. </span>
      <span id="f1954">Children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older they judge them; sometimes they forgive them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1955">His mother! </span>
      <span id="f1956"> He had something on his mind to ask of her, something that he had brooded on for many months of silence. </span>
      <span id="f1957"> A chance phrase that he had heard at the theatre, a whispered sneer that had reached his ears one night as he waited at the stage-door, had set loose a train of horrible thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f1958"> He remembered it as if it had been the lash of a hunting-crop across his face. </span>
      <span id="f1959"> His brows knit together into a wedge-like furrow, and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1960">&#34;You are not listening to a word I am saying, Jim,&#34; cried Sibyl, &#34;and I am making the most delightful plans for your future. </span>
      <span id="f1961"> Do say something.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1962">&#34;What do you want me to say?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1963">&#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f1964">that you will be a good boy and not forget us,&#34; she answered, smiling at him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1965">He shrugged his shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f1966"> &#34;You are more likely to forget me than I am to forget you, Sibyl.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1967">She flushed. </span>
      <span id="f1968"> &#34;What do you mean, Jim?&#34; she asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1969">&#34;You have a new friend, I hear. </span>
      <span id="f1970"> Who is he? </span>
      <span id="f1971"> Why have you not told me about him? </span>
      <span id="f1972"> He means you no good.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1973">&#34;Stop, Jim!&#34; she exclaimed. </span>
      <span id="f1974"> &#34;You must not say anything against him. </span>
      <span id="f1975"> I love him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1976">&#34;Why, you don&#39;t even know his name,&#34; answered the lad. </span>
      <span id="f1977"> &#34;Who is he? </span>
      <span id="f1978"> I have a right to know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f1979">&#34;He is called Prince Charming. </span>
      <span id="f1980"> Don&#39;t you like the name. </span>
      <span id="f1981"> Oh! </span>
      <span id="f1982">you silly boy! </span>
      <span id="f1983">you should never forget it. </span>
      <span id="f1984"> If you only saw him, you would think him the most wonderful person in the world. </span>
      <span id="f1985"> Some day you will meet him--when you come back from Australia. </span>
      <span id="f1986"> You will like him so much. </span>
      <span id="f1987">Everybody likes him, and I ... </span>
      <span id="f1988">love him. </span>
      <span id="f1989"> I wish you could come to the theatre to-night. </span>
      <span id="f1990">He is going to be there, and I am to play Juliet. </span>
      <span id="f1991">Oh! </span>
      <span id="f1992">how I shall play it! </span>
      <span id="f1993"> Fancy, Jim, to be in love and play Juliet! </span>
      <span id="f1994">To have him sitting there! </span>
      <span id="f1995"> To play for his delight! </span>
      <span id="f1996"> I am afraid I may frighten the company, frighten or enthrall them. </span>
      <span id="f1997"> To be in love is to surpass one&#39;s self. </span>
      <span id="f1998"> Poor dreadful Mr. </span>
      <span id="f1999">Isaacs will be shouting &#39;genius&#39; to his loafers at the bar. </span>
      <span id="f2000"> He has preached me as a dogma; to-night he will announce me as a revelation. </span>
      <span id="f2001"> I feel it. </span>
      <span id="f2002"> And it is all his, his only, Prince Charming, my wonderful lover, my god of graces. </span>
      <span id="f2003"> But I am poor beside him. </span>
      <span id="f2004"> Poor? </span>
      <span id="f2005"> What does that matter? </span>
      <span id="f2006"> When poverty creeps in at the door, love flies in through the window. </span>
      <span id="f2007"> Our proverbs want rewriting. </span>
      <span id="f2008"> They were made in winter, and it is summer now; spring-time for me, I think, a very dance of blossoms in blue skies.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2009">&#34;He is a gentleman,&#34; said the lad sullenly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2010">&#34;A prince!&#34; she cried musically. </span>
      <span id="f2011"> &#34;What more do you want?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2012">&#34;He wants to enslave you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2013">&#34;I shudder at the thought of being free.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2014">&#34;I want you to beware of him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2015">&#34;To see him is to worship him; to know him is to trust him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2016">&#34;Sibyl, you are mad about him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2017">She laughed and took his arm. </span>
      <span id="f2018"> &#34;You dear old Jim, you talk as if you were a hundred. </span>
      <span id="f2019"> Some day you will be in love yourself. </span>
      <span id="f2020"> Then you will know what it is. </span>
      <span id="f2021"> Don&#39;t look so sulky. </span>
      <span id="f2022"> Surely you should be glad to think that, though you are going away, you leave me happier than I have ever been before. </span>
      <span id="f2023"> Life has been hard for us both, terribly hard and difficult. </span>
      <span id="f2024"> But it will be different now. </span>
      <span id="f2025"> You are going to a new world, and I have found one. </span>
      <span id="f2026"> Here are two chairs; let us sit down and see the smart people go by.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2027">They took their seats amidst a crowd of watchers. </span>
      <span id="f2028"> The tulip-beds across the road flamed like throbbing rings of fire. </span>
      <span id="f2029"> A white dust--tremulous cloud of orris-root it seemed--hung in the panting air. </span>
      <span id="f2030">The brightly coloured parasols danced and dipped like monstrous butterflies.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2031">She made her brother talk of himself, his hopes, his prospects. </span>
      <span id="f2032"> He spoke slowly and with effort. </span>
      <span id="f2033"> They passed words to each other as players at a game pass counters. </span>
      <span id="f2034"> Sibyl felt oppressed. </span>
      <span id="f2035"> She could not communicate her joy. </span>
      <span id="f2036"> A faint smile curving that sullen mouth was all the echo she could win. </span>
      <span id="f2037"> After some time she became silent. </span>
      <span id="f2038"> Suddenly she caught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, and in an open carriage with two ladies Dorian Gray drove past.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2039">She started to her feet. </span>
      <span id="f2040"> &#34;There he is!&#34; she cried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2041">&#34;Who?&#34; said Jim Vane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2042">&#34;Prince Charming,&#34; she answered, looking after the victoria.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2043">He jumped up and seized her roughly by the arm. </span>
      <span id="f2044"> &#34;Show him to me. </span>
      <span id="f2045">Which is he? </span>
      <span id="f2046"> Point him out. </span>
      <span id="f2047"> I must see him!&#34; he exclaimed; but at that moment the Duke of Berwick&#39;s four-in-hand came between, and when it had left the space clear, the carriage had swept out of the park.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2048">&#34;He is gone,&#34; murmured Sibyl sadly. </span>
      <span id="f2049"> &#34;I wish you had seen him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2050">&#34;I wish I had, for as sure as there is a God in heaven, if he ever does you any wrong, I shall kill him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2051">She looked at him in horror. </span>
      <span id="f2052"> He repeated his words. </span>
      <span id="f2053"> They cut the air like a dagger. </span>
      <span id="f2054"> The people round began to gape. </span>
      <span id="f2055"> A lady standing close to her tittered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2056">&#34;Come away, Jim; come away,&#34; she whispered. </span>
      <span id="f2057"> He followed her doggedly as she passed through the crowd. </span>
      <span id="f2058"> He felt glad at what he had said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2059">When they reached the Achilles Statue, she turned round. </span>
      <span id="f2060"> There was pity in her eyes that became laughter on her lips. </span>
      <span id="f2061"> She shook her head at him. </span>
      <span id="f2062"> &#34;You are foolish, Jim, utterly foolish; a bad-tempered boy, that is all. </span>
      <span id="f2063"> How can you say such horrible things? </span>
      <span id="f2064"> You don&#39;t know what you are talking about. </span>
      <span id="f2065"> You are simply jealous and unkind. </span>
      <span id="f2066"> Ah! </span>
      <span id="f2067"> I wish you would fall in love. </span>
      <span id="f2068"> Love makes people good, and what you said was wicked.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2069">&#34;I am sixteen,&#34; he answered, &#34;and I know what I am about. </span>
      <span id="f2070"> Mother is no help to you. </span>
      <span id="f2071"> She doesn&#39;t understand how to look after you. </span>
      <span id="f2072"> I wish now that I was not going to Australia at all. </span>
      <span id="f2073"> I have a great mind to chuck the whole thing up. </span>
      <span id="f2074"> I would, if my articles hadn&#39;t been signed.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2075">&#34;Oh, don&#39;t be so serious, Jim. </span>
      <span id="f2076"> You are like one of the heroes of those silly melodramas Mother used to be so fond of acting in. </span>
      <span id="f2077"> I am not going to quarrel with you. </span>
      <span id="f2078"> I have seen him, and oh! </span>
      <span id="f2079">to see him is perfect happiness. </span>
      <span id="f2080"> We won&#39;t quarrel. </span>
      <span id="f2081"> I know you would never harm any one I love, would you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2082">&#34;Not as long as you love him, I suppose,&#34; was the sullen answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2083">&#34;I shall love him for ever!&#34; she cried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2084">&#34;And he?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2085">&#34;For ever, too!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2086">&#34;He had better.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2087">She shrank from him. </span>
      <span id="f2088"> Then she laughed and put her hand on his arm. </span>
      <span id="f2089"> He was merely a boy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2090">At the Marble Arch they hailed an omnibus, which left them close to their shabby home in the Euston Road. </span>
      <span id="f2091"> It was after five o&#39;clock, and Sibyl had to lie down for a couple of hours before acting. </span>
      <span id="f2092"> Jim insisted that she should do so. </span>
      <span id="f2093"> He said that he would sooner part with her when their mother was not present. </span>
      <span id="f2094"> She would be sure to make a scene, and he detested scenes of every kind.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2095">In Sybil&#39;s own room they parted. </span>
      <span id="f2096"> There was jealousy in the lad&#39;s heart, and a fierce murderous hatred of the stranger who, as it seemed to him, had come between them. </span>
      <span id="f2097"> Yet, when her arms were flung round his neck, and her fingers strayed through his hair, he softened and kissed her with real affection. </span>
      <span id="f2098"> There were tears in his eyes as he went downstairs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2099">His mother was waiting for him below. </span>
      <span id="f2100"> She grumbled at his unpunctuality, as he entered. </span>
      <span id="f2101"> He made no answer, but sat down to his meagre meal. </span>
      <span id="f2102"> The flies buzzed round the table and crawled over the stained cloth. </span>
      <span id="f2103"> Through the rumble of omnibuses, and the clatter of street-cabs, he could hear the droning voice devouring each minute that was left to him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2104">After some time, he thrust away his plate and put his head in his hands. </span>
      <span id="f2105"> He felt that he had a right to know. </span>
      <span id="f2106"> It should have been told to him before, if it was as he suspected. </span>
      <span id="f2107"> Leaden with fear, his mother watched him. </span>
      <span id="f2108"> Words dropped mechanically from her lips. </span>
      <span id="f2109"> A tattered lace handkerchief twitched in her fingers. </span>
      <span id="f2110"> When the clock struck six, he got up and went to the door. </span>
      <span id="f2111"> Then he turned back and looked at her. </span>
      <span id="f2112">Their eyes met. </span>
      <span id="f2113"> In hers he saw a wild appeal for mercy. </span>
      <span id="f2114"> It enraged him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2115">&#34;Mother, I have something to ask you,&#34; he said. </span>
      <span id="f2116"> Her eyes wandered vaguely about the room. </span>
      <span id="f2117"> She made no answer. </span>
      <span id="f2118"> &#34;Tell me the truth. </span>
      <span id="f2119"> I have a right to know. </span>
      <span id="f2120"> Were you married to my father?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2121">She heaved a deep sigh. </span>
      <span id="f2122"> It was a sigh of relief. </span>
      <span id="f2123"> The terrible moment, the moment that night and day, for weeks and months, she had dreaded, had come at last, and yet she felt no terror. </span>
      <span id="f2124"> Indeed, in some measure it was a disappointment to her. </span>
      <span id="f2125"> The vulgar directness of the question called for a direct answer. </span>
      <span id="f2126"> The situation had not been gradually led up to. </span>
      <span id="f2127"> It was crude. </span>
      <span id="f2128"> It reminded her of a bad rehearsal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2129">&#34;No,&#34; she answered, wondering at the harsh simplicity of life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2130">&#34;My father was a scoundrel then!&#34; cried the lad, clenching his fists.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2131">She shook her head. </span>
      <span id="f2132"> &#34;I knew he was not free. </span>
      <span id="f2133"> We loved each other very much. </span>
      <span id="f2134"> If he had lived, he would have made provision for us. </span>
      <span id="f2135"> Don&#39;t speak against him, my son. </span>
      <span id="f2136"> He was your father, and a gentleman. </span>
      <span id="f2137">Indeed, he was highly connected.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2138">An oath broke from his lips. </span>
      <span id="f2139"> &#34;I don&#39;t care for myself,&#34; he exclaimed, &#34;but don&#39;t let Sibyl.... </span>
      <span id="f2140">It is a gentleman, isn&#39;t it, who is in love with her, or says he is? </span>
      <span id="f2141"> Highly connected, too, I suppose.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2142">For a moment a hideous sense of humiliation came over the woman. </span>
      <span id="f2143"> Her head drooped. </span>
      <span id="f2144"> She wiped her eyes with shaking hands. </span>
      <span id="f2145"> &#34;Sibyl has a mother,&#34; she murmured; &#34;I had none.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2146">The lad was touched. </span>
      <span id="f2147"> He went towards her, and stooping down, he kissed her. </span>
      <span id="f2148"> &#34;I am sorry if I have pained you by asking about my father,&#34; he said, &#34;but I could not help it. </span>
      <span id="f2149"> I must go now. </span>
      <span id="f2150"> Good-bye. </span>
      <span id="f2151">Don&#39;t forget that you will have only one child now to look after, and believe me that if this man wrongs my sister, I will find out who he is, track him down, and kill him like a dog. </span>
      <span id="f2152"> I swear it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2153">The exaggerated folly of the threat, the passionate gesture that accompanied it, the mad melodramatic words, made life seem more vivid to her. </span>
      <span id="f2154"> She was familiar with the atmosphere. </span>
      <span id="f2155"> She breathed more freely, and for the first time for many months she really admired her son. </span>
      <span id="f2156"> She would have liked to have continued the scene on the same emotional scale, but he cut her short. </span>
      <span id="f2157"> Trunks had to be carried down and mufflers looked for. </span>
      <span id="f2158"> The lodging-house drudge bustled in and out. </span>
      <span id="f2159">There was the bargaining with the cabman. </span>
      <span id="f2160"> The moment was lost in vulgar details. </span>
      <span id="f2161"> It was with a renewed feeling of disappointment that she waved the tattered lace handkerchief from the window, as her son drove away. </span>
      <span id="f2162"> She was conscious that a great opportunity had been wasted. </span>
      <span id="f2163"> She consoled herself by telling Sibyl how desolate she felt her life would be, now that she had only one child to look after. </span>
      <span id="f2164"> She remembered the phrase. </span>
      <span id="f2165"> It had pleased her. </span>
      <span id="f2166"> Of the threat she said nothing. </span>
      <span id="f2167"> It was vividly and dramatically expressed. </span>
      <span id="f2168"> She felt that they would all laugh at it some day.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>