<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER 6</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f2169">CHAPTER 6</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f2170">&#34;I suppose you have heard the news, Basil?&#34; said Lord Henry that evening as Hallward was shown into a little private room at the Bristol where dinner had been laid for three.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2171">&#34;No, Harry,&#34; answered the artist, giving his hat and coat to the bowing waiter. </span>
      <span id="f2172"> &#34;What is it? </span>
      <span id="f2173"> Nothing about politics, I hope! </span>
      <span id="f2174"> They don&#39;t interest me. </span>
      <span id="f2175"> There is hardly a single person in the House of Commons worth painting, though many of them would be the better for a little whitewashing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2176">&#34;Dorian Gray is engaged to be married,&#34; said Lord Henry, watching him as he spoke.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2177">Hallward started and then frowned. </span>
      <span id="f2178"> &#34;Dorian engaged to be married!&#34; he cried. </span>
      <span id="f2179"> &#34;Impossible!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2180">&#34;It is perfectly true.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2181">&#34;To whom?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2182">&#34;To some little actress or other.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2183">&#34;I can&#39;t believe it. </span>
      <span id="f2184"> Dorian is far too sensible.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2185">&#34;Dorian is far too wise not to do foolish things now and then, my dear Basil.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2186">&#34;Marriage is hardly a thing that one can do now and then, Harry.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2187">&#34;Except in America,&#34; rejoined Lord Henry languidly. </span>
      <span id="f2188"> &#34;But I didn&#39;t say he was married. </span>
      <span id="f2189"> I said he was engaged to be married. </span>
      <span id="f2190"> There is a great difference. </span>
      <span id="f2191"> I have a distinct remembrance of being married, but I have no recollection at all of being engaged. </span>
      <span id="f2192"> I am inclined to think that I never was engaged.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2193">&#34;But think of Dorian&#39;s birth, and position, and wealth. </span>
      <span id="f2194"> It would be absurd for him to marry so much beneath him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2195">&#34;If you want to make him marry this girl, tell him that, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f2196"> He is sure to do it, then. </span>
      <span id="f2197"> Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, it is always from the noblest motives.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2198">&#34;I hope the girl is good, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f2199"> I don&#39;t want to see Dorian tied to some vile creature, who might degrade his nature and ruin his intellect.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2200">&#34;Oh, she is better than good--she is beautiful,&#34; murmured Lord Henry, sipping a glass of vermouth and orange-bitters. </span>
      <span id="f2201">&#34;Dorian says she is beautiful, and he is not often wrong about things of that kind. </span>
      <span id="f2202"> Your portrait of him has quickened his appreciation of the personal appearance of other people. </span>
      <span id="f2203"> It has had that excellent effect, amongst others. </span>
      <span id="f2204"> We are to see her to-night, if that boy doesn&#39;t forget his appointment.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2205">&#34;Are you serious?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2206">&#34;Quite serious, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f2207"> I should be miserable if I thought I should ever be more serious than I am at the present moment.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2208">&#34;But do you approve of it, Harry?&#34; asked the painter, walking up and down the room and biting his lip. </span>
      <span id="f2209"> &#34;You can&#39;t approve of it, possibly. </span>
      <span id="f2210">It is some silly infatuation.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2211">&#34;I never approve, or disapprove, of anything now. </span>
      <span id="f2212"> It is an absurd attitude to take towards life. </span>
      <span id="f2213"> We are not sent into the world to air our moral prejudices. </span>
      <span id="f2214"> I never take any notice of what common people say, and I never interfere with what charming people do. </span>
      <span id="f2215"> If a personality fascinates me, whatever mode of expression that personality selects is absolutely delightful to me. </span>
      <span id="f2216"> Dorian Gray falls in love with a beautiful girl who acts Juliet, and proposes to marry her. </span>
      <span id="f2217"> Why not? </span>
      <span id="f2218">If he wedded Messalina, he would be none the less interesting. </span>
      <span id="f2219"> You know I am not a champion of marriage. </span>
      <span id="f2220"> The real drawback to marriage is that it makes one unselfish. </span>
      <span id="f2221"> And unselfish people are colourless. </span>
      <span id="f2222">They lack individuality. </span>
      <span id="f2223"> Still, there are certain temperaments that marriage makes more complex. </span>
      <span id="f2224"> They retain their egotism, and add to it many other egos. </span>
      <span id="f2225"> They are forced to have more than one life. </span>
      <span id="f2226"> They become more highly organized, and to be highly organized is, I should fancy, the object of man&#39;s existence. </span>
      <span id="f2227"> Besides, every experience is of value, and whatever one may say against marriage, it is certainly an experience. </span>
      <span id="f2228"> I hope that Dorian Gray will make this girl his wife, passionately adore her for six months, and then suddenly become fascinated by some one else. </span>
      <span id="f2229"> He would be a wonderful study.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2230">&#34;You don&#39;t mean a single word of all that, Harry; you know you don&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f2231">If Dorian Gray&#39;s life were spoiled, no one would be sorrier than yourself. </span>
      <span id="f2232"> You are much better than you pretend to be.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2233">Lord Henry laughed. </span>
      <span id="f2234"> &#34;The reason we all like to think so well of others is that we are all afraid for ourselves. </span>
      <span id="f2235"> The basis of optimism is sheer terror. </span>
      <span id="f2236"> We think that we are generous because we credit our neighbour with the possession of those virtues that are likely to be a benefit to us. </span>
      <span id="f2237"> We praise the banker that we may overdraw our account, and find good qualities in the highwayman in the hope that he may spare our pockets. </span>
      <span id="f2238"> I mean everything that I have said. </span>
      <span id="f2239"> I have the greatest contempt for optimism. </span>
      <span id="f2240"> As for a spoiled life, no life is spoiled but one whose growth is arrested. </span>
      <span id="f2241"> If you want to mar a nature, you have merely to reform it. </span>
      <span id="f2242"> As for marriage, of course that would be silly, but there are other and more interesting bonds between men and women. </span>
      <span id="f2243">I will certainly encourage them. </span>
      <span id="f2244"> They have the charm of being fashionable. </span>
      <span id="f2245"> But here is Dorian himself. </span>
      <span id="f2246"> He will tell you more than I can.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2247">&#34;My dear Harry, my dear Basil, you must both congratulate me!&#34; said the lad, throwing off his evening cape with its satin-lined wings and shaking each of his friends by the hand in turn. </span>
      <span id="f2248"> &#34;I have never been so happy. </span>
      <span id="f2249"> Of course, it is sudden--all really delightful things are. </span>
      <span id="f2250"> And yet it seems to me to be the one thing I have been looking for all my life.&#34; He was flushed with excitement and pleasure, and looked extraordinarily handsome.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2251">&#34;I hope you will always be very happy, Dorian,&#34; said Hallward, &#34;but I don&#39;t quite forgive you for not having let me know of your engagement. </span>
      <span id="f2252">You let Harry know.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2253">&#34;And I don&#39;t forgive you for being late for dinner,&#34; broke in Lord Henry, putting his hand on the lad&#39;s shoulder and smiling as he spoke. </span>
      <span id="f2254">&#34;Come, let us sit down and try what the new _chef_ here is like, and then you will tell us how it all came about.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2255">&#34;There is really not much to tell,&#34; cried Dorian as they took their seats at the small round table. </span>
      <span id="f2256"> &#34;What happened was simply this. </span>
      <span id="f2257"> After I left you yesterday evening, Harry, I dressed, had some dinner at that little Italian restaurant in Rupert Street you introduced me to, and went down at eight o&#39;clock to the theatre. </span>
      <span id="f2258"> Sibyl was playing Rosalind. </span>
      <span id="f2259">Of course, the scenery was dreadful and the Orlando absurd. </span>
      <span id="f2260"> But Sibyl! </span>
      <span id="f2261">You should have seen her! </span>
      <span id="f2262"> When she came on in her boy&#39;s clothes, she was perfectly wonderful. </span>
      <span id="f2263"> She wore a moss-coloured velvet jerkin with cinnamon sleeves, slim, brown, cross-gartered hose, a dainty little green cap with a hawk&#39;s feather caught in a jewel, and a hooded cloak lined with dull red. </span>
      <span id="f2264"> She had never seemed to me more exquisite. </span>
      <span id="f2265"> She had all the delicate grace of that Tanagra figurine that you have in your studio, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f2266"> Her hair clustered round her face like dark leaves round a pale rose. </span>
      <span id="f2267"> As for her acting--well, you shall see her to-night. </span>
      <span id="f2268">She is simply a born artist. </span>
      <span id="f2269"> I sat in the dingy box absolutely enthralled. </span>
      <span id="f2270"> I forgot that I was in London and in the nineteenth century. </span>
      <span id="f2271"> I was away with my love in a forest that no man had ever seen. </span>
      <span id="f2272"> After the performance was over, I went behind and spoke to her. </span>
      <span id="f2273"> As we were sitting together, suddenly there came into her eyes a look that I had never seen there before. </span>
      <span id="f2274"> My lips moved towards hers. </span>
      <span id="f2275">We kissed each other. </span>
      <span id="f2276"> I can&#39;t describe to you what I felt at that moment. </span>
      <span id="f2277"> It seemed to me that all my life had been narrowed to one perfect point of rose-coloured joy. </span>
      <span id="f2278"> She trembled all over and shook like a white narcissus. </span>
      <span id="f2279"> Then she flung herself on her knees and kissed my hands. </span>
      <span id="f2280"> I feel that I should not tell you all this, but I can&#39;t help it. </span>
      <span id="f2281"> Of course, our engagement is a dead secret. </span>
      <span id="f2282"> She has not even told her own mother. </span>
      <span id="f2283"> I don&#39;t know what my guardians will say. </span>
      <span id="f2284"> Lord Radley is sure to be furious. </span>
      <span id="f2285"> I don&#39;t care. </span>
      <span id="f2286"> I shall be of age in less than a year, and then I can do what I like. </span>
      <span id="f2287"> I have been right, Basil, haven&#39;t I, to take my love out of poetry and to find my wife in Shakespeare&#39;s plays? </span>
      <span id="f2288"> Lips that Shakespeare taught to speak have whispered their secret in my ear. </span>
      <span id="f2289"> I have had the arms of Rosalind around me, and kissed Juliet on the mouth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2290">&#34;Yes, Dorian, I suppose you were right,&#34; said Hallward slowly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2291">&#34;Have you seen her to-day?&#34; asked Lord Henry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2292">Dorian Gray shook his head. </span>
      <span id="f2293"> &#34;I left her in the forest of Arden; I shall find her in an orchard in Verona.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2294">Lord Henry sipped his champagne in a meditative manner. </span>
      <span id="f2295"> &#34;At what particular point did you mention the word marriage, Dorian? </span>
      <span id="f2296"> And what did she say in answer? </span>
      <span id="f2297"> Perhaps you forgot all about it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2298">&#34;My dear Harry, I did not treat it as a business transaction, and I did not make any formal proposal. </span>
      <span id="f2299"> I told her that I loved her, and she said she was not worthy to be my wife. </span>
      <span id="f2300"> Not worthy! </span>
      <span id="f2301"> Why, the whole world is nothing to me compared with her.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2302">&#34;Women are wonderfully practical,&#34; murmured Lord Henry, &#34;much more practical than we are. </span>
      <span id="f2303"> In situations of that kind we often forget to say anything about marriage, and they always remind us.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2304">Hallward laid his hand upon his arm. </span>
      <span id="f2305"> &#34;Don&#39;t, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f2306"> You have annoyed Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f2307"> He is not like other men. </span>
      <span id="f2308"> He would never bring misery upon any one. </span>
      <span id="f2309"> His nature is too fine for that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2310">Lord Henry looked across the table. </span>
      <span id="f2311"> &#34;Dorian is never annoyed with me,&#34; he answered. </span>
      <span id="f2312"> &#34;I asked the question for the best reason possible, for the only reason, indeed, that excuses one for asking any question--simple curiosity. </span>
      <span id="f2313"> I have a theory that it is always the women who propose to us, and not we who propose to the women. </span>
      <span id="f2314"> Except, of course, in middle-class life. </span>
      <span id="f2315"> But then the middle classes are not modern.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2316">Dorian Gray laughed, and tossed his head. </span>
      <span id="f2317"> &#34;You are quite incorrigible, Harry; but I don&#39;t mind. </span>
      <span id="f2318"> It is impossible to be angry with you. </span>
      <span id="f2319"> When you see Sibyl Vane, you will feel that the man who could wrong her would be a beast, a beast without a heart. </span>
      <span id="f2320"> I cannot understand how any one can wish to shame the thing he loves. </span>
      <span id="f2321"> I love Sibyl Vane. </span>
      <span id="f2322"> I want to place her on a pedestal of gold and to see the world worship the woman who is mine. </span>
      <span id="f2323"> What is marriage? </span>
      <span id="f2324"> An irrevocable vow. </span>
      <span id="f2325"> You mock at it for that. </span>
      <span id="f2326"> Ah! </span>
      <span id="f2327">don&#39;t mock. </span>
      <span id="f2328"> It is an irrevocable vow that I want to take. </span>
      <span id="f2329"> Her trust makes me faithful, her belief makes me good. </span>
      <span id="f2330"> When I am with her, I regret all that you have taught me. </span>
      <span id="f2331"> I become different from what you have known me to be. </span>
      <span id="f2332"> I am changed, and the mere touch of Sibyl Vane&#39;s hand makes me forget you and all your wrong, fascinating, poisonous, delightful theories.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2333">&#34;And those are ...?&#34; asked Lord Henry, helping himself to some salad.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2334">&#34;Oh, your theories about life, your theories about love, your theories about pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f2335"> All your theories, in fact, Harry.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2336">&#34;Pleasure is the only thing worth having a theory about,&#34; he answered in his slow melodious voice. </span>
      <span id="f2337"> &#34;But I am afraid I cannot claim my theory as my own. </span>
      <span id="f2338"> It belongs to Nature, not to me. </span>
      <span id="f2339"> Pleasure is Nature&#39;s test, her sign of approval. </span>
      <span id="f2340"> When we are happy, we are always good, but when we are good, we are not always happy.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2341">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f2342">but what do you mean by good?&#34; cried Basil Hallward.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2343">&#34;Yes,&#34; echoed Dorian, leaning back in his chair and looking at Lord Henry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises that stood in the centre of the table, &#34;what do you mean by good, Harry?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2344">&#34;To be good is to be in harmony with one&#39;s self,&#34; he replied, touching the thin stem of his glass with his pale, fine-pointed fingers. </span>
      <span id="f2345">&#34;Discord is to be forced to be in harmony with others. </span>
      <span id="f2346"> One&#39;s own life--that is the important thing. </span>
      <span id="f2347"> As for the lives of one&#39;s neighbours, if one wishes to be a prig or a Puritan, one can flaunt one&#39;s moral views about them, but they are not one&#39;s concern. </span>
      <span id="f2348"> Besides, individualism has really the higher aim. </span>
      <span id="f2349"> Modern morality consists in accepting the standard of one&#39;s age. </span>
      <span id="f2350"> I consider that for any man of culture to accept the standard of his age is a form of the grossest immorality.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2351">&#34;But, surely, if one lives merely for one&#39;s self, Harry, one pays a terrible price for doing so?&#34; suggested the painter.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2352">&#34;Yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays. </span>
      <span id="f2353"> I should fancy that the real tragedy of the poor is that they can afford nothing but self-denial. </span>
      <span id="f2354">Beautiful sins, like beautiful things, are the privilege of the rich.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2355">&#34;One has to pay in other ways but money.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2356">&#34;What sort of ways, Basil?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2357">&#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f2358"> I should fancy in remorse, in suffering, in ... </span>
      <span id="f2359">well, in the consciousness of degradation.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2360">Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f2361"> &#34;My dear fellow, mediaeval art is charming, but mediaeval emotions are out of date. </span>
      <span id="f2362"> One can use them in fiction, of course. </span>
      <span id="f2363"> But then the only things that one can use in fiction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact. </span>
      <span id="f2364"> Believe me, no civilized man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilized man ever knows what a pleasure is.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2365">&#34;I know what pleasure is,&#34; cried Dorian Gray. </span>
      <span id="f2366"> &#34;It is to adore some one.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2367">&#34;That is certainly better than being adored,&#34; he answered, toying with some fruits. </span>
      <span id="f2368"> &#34;Being adored is a nuisance. </span>
      <span id="f2369"> Women treat us just as humanity treats its gods. </span>
      <span id="f2370"> They worship us, and are always bothering us to do something for them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2371">&#34;I should have said that whatever they ask for they had first given to us,&#34; murmured the lad gravely. </span>
      <span id="f2372"> &#34;They create love in our natures. </span>
      <span id="f2373"> They have a right to demand it back.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2374">&#34;That is quite true, Dorian,&#34; cried Hallward.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2375">&#34;Nothing is ever quite true,&#34; said Lord Henry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2376">&#34;This is,&#34; interrupted Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f2377"> &#34;You must admit, Harry, that women give to men the very gold of their lives.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2378">&#34;Possibly,&#34; he sighed, &#34;but they invariably want it back in such very small change. </span>
      <span id="f2379"> That is the worry. </span>
      <span id="f2380"> Women, as some witty Frenchman once put it, inspire us with the desire to do masterpieces and always prevent us from carrying them out.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2381">&#34;Harry, you are dreadful! </span>
      <span id="f2382"> I don&#39;t know why I like you so much.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2383">&#34;You will always like me, Dorian,&#34; he replied. </span>
      <span id="f2384"> &#34;Will you have some coffee, you fellows? </span>
      <span id="f2385"> Waiter, bring coffee, and _fine-champagne_, and some cigarettes. </span>
      <span id="f2386"> No, don&#39;t mind the cigarettes--I have some. </span>
      <span id="f2387"> Basil, I can&#39;t allow you to smoke cigars. </span>
      <span id="f2388"> You must have a cigarette. </span>
      <span id="f2389"> A cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f2390"> It is exquisite, and it leaves one unsatisfied. </span>
      <span id="f2391"> What more can one want? </span>
      <span id="f2392"> Yes, Dorian, you will always be fond of me. </span>
      <span id="f2393"> I represent to you all the sins you have never had the courage to commit.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2394">&#34;What nonsense you talk, Harry!&#34; cried the lad, taking a light from a fire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the table. </span>
      <span id="f2395">&#34;Let us go down to the theatre. </span>
      <span id="f2396"> When Sibyl comes on the stage you will have a new ideal of life. </span>
      <span id="f2397"> She will represent something to you that you have never known.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2398">&#34;I have known everything,&#34; said Lord Henry, with a tired look in his eyes, &#34;but I am always ready for a new emotion. </span>
      <span id="f2399"> I am afraid, however, that, for me at any rate, there is no such thing. </span>
      <span id="f2400"> Still, your wonderful girl may thrill me. </span>
      <span id="f2401"> I love acting. </span>
      <span id="f2402"> It is so much more real than life. </span>
      <span id="f2403"> Let us go. </span>
      <span id="f2404"> Dorian, you will come with me. </span>
      <span id="f2405"> I am so sorry, Basil, but there is only room for two in the brougham. </span>
      <span id="f2406"> You must follow us in a hansom.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2407">They got up and put on their coats, sipping their coffee standing. </span>
      <span id="f2408"> The painter was silent and preoccupied. </span>
      <span id="f2409"> There was a gloom over him. </span>
      <span id="f2410"> He could not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him to be better than many other things that might have happened. </span>
      <span id="f2411"> After a few minutes, they all passed downstairs. </span>
      <span id="f2412"> He drove off by himself, as had been arranged, and watched the flashing lights of the little brougham in front of him. </span>
      <span id="f2413"> A strange sense of loss came over him. </span>
      <span id="f2414"> He felt that Dorian Gray would never again be to him all that he had been in the past. </span>
      <span id="f2415"> Life had come between them.... </span>
      <span id="f2416">His eyes darkened, and the crowded flaring streets became blurred to his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f2417"> When the cab drew up at the theatre, it seemed to him that he had grown years older.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>