<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER 7</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f2418">CHAPTER 7</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f2419">For some reason or other, the house was crowded that night, and the fat Jew manager who met them at the door was beaming from ear to ear with an oily tremulous smile. </span>
      <span id="f2420"> He escorted them to their box with a sort of pompous humility, waving his fat jewelled hands and talking at the top of his voice. </span>
      <span id="f2421"> Dorian Gray loathed him more than ever. </span>
      <span id="f2422"> He felt as if he had come to look for Miranda and had been met by Caliban. </span>
      <span id="f2423"> Lord Henry, upon the other hand, rather liked him. </span>
      <span id="f2424"> At least he declared he did, and insisted on shaking him by the hand and assuring him that he was proud to meet a man who had discovered a real genius and gone bankrupt over a poet. </span>
      <span id="f2425"> Hallward amused himself with watching the faces in the pit. </span>
      <span id="f2426"> The heat was terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight flamed like a monstrous dahlia with petals of yellow fire. </span>
      <span id="f2427"> The youths in the gallery had taken off their coats and waistcoats and hung them over the side. </span>
      <span id="f2428"> They talked to each other across the theatre and shared their oranges with the tawdry girls who sat beside them. </span>
      <span id="f2429"> Some women were laughing in the pit. </span>
      <span id="f2430"> Their voices were horribly shrill and discordant. </span>
      <span id="f2431"> The sound of the popping of corks came from the bar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2432">&#34;What a place to find one&#39;s divinity in!&#34; said Lord Henry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2433">&#34;Yes!&#34; answered Dorian Gray. </span>
      <span id="f2434"> &#34;It was here I found her, and she is divine beyond all living things. </span>
      <span id="f2435"> When she acts, you will forget everything. </span>
      <span id="f2436"> These common rough people, with their coarse faces and brutal gestures, become quite different when she is on the stage. </span>
      <span id="f2437"> They sit silently and watch her. </span>
      <span id="f2438"> They weep and laugh as she wills them to do. </span>
      <span id="f2439"> She makes them as responsive as a violin. </span>
      <span id="f2440"> She spiritualizes them, and one feels that they are of the same flesh and blood as one&#39;s self.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2441">&#34;The same flesh and blood as one&#39;s self! </span>
      <span id="f2442"> Oh, I hope not!&#34; exclaimed Lord Henry, who was scanning the occupants of the gallery through his opera-glass.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2443">&#34;Don&#39;t pay any attention to him, Dorian,&#34; said the painter. </span>
      <span id="f2444"> &#34;I understand what you mean, and I believe in this girl. </span>
      <span id="f2445"> Any one you love must be marvellous, and any girl who has the effect you describe must be fine and noble. </span>
      <span id="f2446"> To spiritualize one&#39;s age--that is something worth doing. </span>
      <span id="f2447"> If this girl can give a soul to those who have lived without one, if she can create the sense of beauty in people whose lives have been sordid and ugly, if she can strip them of their selfishness and lend them tears for sorrows that are not their own, she is worthy of all your adoration, worthy of the adoration of the world. </span>
      <span id="f2448"> This marriage is quite right. </span>
      <span id="f2449"> I did not think so at first, but I admit it now. </span>
      <span id="f2450"> The gods made Sibyl Vane for you. </span>
      <span id="f2451"> Without her you would have been incomplete.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2452">&#34;Thanks, Basil,&#34; answered Dorian Gray, pressing his hand. </span>
      <span id="f2453"> &#34;I knew that you would understand me. </span>
      <span id="f2454"> Harry is so cynical, he terrifies me. </span>
      <span id="f2455"> But here is the orchestra. </span>
      <span id="f2456"> It is quite dreadful, but it only lasts for about five minutes. </span>
      <span id="f2457"> Then the curtain rises, and you will see the girl to whom I am going to give all my life, to whom I have given everything that is good in me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2458">A quarter of an hour afterwards, amidst an extraordinary turmoil of applause, Sibyl Vane stepped on to the stage. </span>
      <span id="f2459"> Yes, she was certainly lovely to look at--one of the loveliest creatures, Lord Henry thought, that he had ever seen. </span>
      <span id="f2460"> There was something of the fawn in her shy grace and startled eyes. </span>
      <span id="f2461"> A faint blush, like the shadow of a rose in a mirror of silver, came to her cheeks as she glanced at the crowded enthusiastic house. </span>
      <span id="f2462"> She stepped back a few paces and her lips seemed to tremble. </span>
      <span id="f2463"> Basil Hallward leaped to his feet and began to applaud. </span>
      <span id="f2464">Motionless, and as one in a dream, sat Dorian Gray, gazing at her. </span>
      <span id="f2465">Lord Henry peered through his glasses, murmuring, &#34;Charming! </span>
      <span id="f2466">charming!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2467">The scene was the hall of Capulet&#39;s house, and Romeo in his pilgrim&#39;s dress had entered with Mercutio and his other friends. </span>
      <span id="f2468"> The band, such as it was, struck up a few bars of music, and the dance began. </span>
      <span id="f2469"> Through the crowd of ungainly, shabbily dressed actors, Sibyl Vane moved like a creature from a finer world. </span>
      <span id="f2470"> Her body swayed, while she danced, as a plant sways in the water. </span>
      <span id="f2471"> The curves of her throat were the curves of a white lily. </span>
      <span id="f2472"> Her hands seemed to be made of cool ivory.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2473">Yet she was curiously listless. </span>
      <span id="f2474"> She showed no sign of joy when her eyes rested on Romeo. </span>
      <span id="f2475"> The few words she had to speak--</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2476">Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,         Which mannerly devotion shows in this;     For saints have hands that pilgrims&#39; hands do touch,         And palm to palm is holy palmers&#39; kiss--</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2477">with the brief dialogue that follows, were spoken in a thoroughly artificial manner. </span>
      <span id="f2478"> The voice was exquisite, but from the point of view of tone it was absolutely false. </span>
      <span id="f2479"> It was wrong in colour. </span>
      <span id="f2480"> It took away all the life from the verse. </span>
      <span id="f2481"> It made the passion unreal.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2482">Dorian Gray grew pale as he watched her. </span>
      <span id="f2483"> He was puzzled and anxious. </span>
      <span id="f2484">Neither of his friends dared to say anything to him. </span>
      <span id="f2485"> She seemed to them to be absolutely incompetent. </span>
      <span id="f2486"> They were horribly disappointed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2487">Yet they felt that the true test of any Juliet is the balcony scene of the second act. </span>
      <span id="f2488"> They waited for that. </span>
      <span id="f2489"> If she failed there, there was nothing in her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2490">She looked charming as she came out in the moonlight. </span>
      <span id="f2491"> That could not be denied. </span>
      <span id="f2492"> But the staginess of her acting was unbearable, and grew worse as she went on. </span>
      <span id="f2493"> Her gestures became absurdly artificial. </span>
      <span id="f2494"> She overemphasized everything that she had to say. </span>
      <span id="f2495"> The beautiful passage--</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2496">Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,     Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek     For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night--</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2497">was declaimed with the painful precision of a schoolgirl who has been taught to recite by some second-rate professor of elocution. </span>
      <span id="f2498">When she leaned over the balcony and came to those wonderful lines--</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2499">Although I joy in thee,     I have no joy of this contract to-night:     It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;     Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be     Ere one can say, &#34;It lightens.&#34;  Sweet, good-night! </span>
      <span id="f2500">    This bud of love by summer&#39;s ripening breath     May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet--</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2501">she spoke the words as though they conveyed no meaning to her. </span>
      <span id="f2502">It was not nervousness. </span>
      <span id="f2503">Indeed, so far from being nervous, she was absolutely self-contained. </span>
      <span id="f2504">It was simply bad art. </span>
      <span id="f2505">She was a complete failure.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2506">Even the common uneducated audience of the pit and gallery lost their interest in the play. </span>
      <span id="f2507">They got restless, and began to talk loudly and to whistle. </span>
      <span id="f2508">The Jew manager, who was standing at the back of the dress-circle, stamped and swore with rage. </span>
      <span id="f2509">The only person unmoved was the girl herself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2510">When the second act was over, there came a storm of hisses, and Lord Henry got up from his chair and put on his coat. </span>
      <span id="f2511"> &#34;She is quite beautiful, Dorian,&#34; he said, &#34;but she can&#39;t act. </span>
      <span id="f2512"> Let us go.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2513">&#34;I am going to see the play through,&#34; answered the lad, in a hard bitter voice. </span>
      <span id="f2514"> &#34;I am awfully sorry that I have made you waste an evening, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f2515"> I apologize to you both.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2516">&#34;My dear Dorian, I should think Miss Vane was ill,&#34; interrupted Hallward. </span>
      <span id="f2517"> &#34;We will come some other night.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2518">&#34;I wish she were ill,&#34; he rejoined. </span>
      <span id="f2519"> &#34;But she seems to me to be simply callous and cold. </span>
      <span id="f2520"> She has entirely altered. </span>
      <span id="f2521"> Last night she was a great artist. </span>
      <span id="f2522"> This evening she is merely a commonplace mediocre actress.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2523">&#34;Don&#39;t talk like that about any one you love, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f2524"> Love is a more wonderful thing than art.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2525">&#34;They are both simply forms of imitation,&#34; remarked Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f2526"> &#34;But do let us go. </span>
      <span id="f2527"> Dorian, you must not stay here any longer. </span>
      <span id="f2528"> It is not good for one&#39;s morals to see bad acting. </span>
      <span id="f2529"> Besides, I don&#39;t suppose you will want your wife to act, so what does it matter if she plays Juliet like a wooden doll? </span>
      <span id="f2530"> She is very lovely, and if she knows as little about life as she does about acting, she will be a delightful experience. </span>
      <span id="f2531"> There are only two kinds of people who are really fascinating--people who know absolutely everything, and people who know absolutely nothing. </span>
      <span id="f2532"> Good heavens, my dear boy, don&#39;t look so tragic! </span>
      <span id="f2533">The secret of remaining young is never to have an emotion that is unbecoming. </span>
      <span id="f2534"> Come to the club with Basil and myself. </span>
      <span id="f2535"> We will smoke cigarettes and drink to the beauty of Sibyl Vane. </span>
      <span id="f2536"> She is beautiful. </span>
      <span id="f2537">What more can you want?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2538">&#34;Go away, Harry,&#34; cried the lad. </span>
      <span id="f2539"> &#34;I want to be alone. </span>
      <span id="f2540"> Basil, you must go. </span>
      <span id="f2541"> Ah! </span>
      <span id="f2542">can&#39;t you see that my heart is breaking?&#34;  The hot tears came to his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f2543"> His lips trembled, and rushing to the back of the box, he leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2544">&#34;Let us go, Basil,&#34; said Lord Henry with a strange tenderness in his voice, and the two young men passed out together.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2545">A few moments afterwards the footlights flared up and the curtain rose on the third act. </span>
      <span id="f2546"> Dorian Gray went back to his seat. </span>
      <span id="f2547"> He looked pale, and proud, and indifferent. </span>
      <span id="f2548"> The play dragged on, and seemed interminable. </span>
      <span id="f2549"> Half of the audience went out, tramping in heavy boots and laughing. </span>
      <span id="f2550"> The whole thing was a _fiasco_. </span>
      <span id="f2551"> The last act was played to almost empty benches. </span>
      <span id="f2552"> The curtain went down on a titter and some groans.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2553">As soon as it was over, Dorian Gray rushed behind the scenes into the greenroom. </span>
      <span id="f2554"> The girl was standing there alone, with a look of triumph on her face. </span>
      <span id="f2555"> Her eyes were lit with an exquisite fire. </span>
      <span id="f2556"> There was a radiance about her. </span>
      <span id="f2557"> Her parted lips were smiling over some secret of their own.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2558">When he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joy came over her. </span>
      <span id="f2559"> &#34;How badly I acted to-night, Dorian!&#34; she cried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2560">&#34;Horribly!&#34; he answered, gazing at her in amazement. </span>
      <span id="f2561"> &#34;Horribly! </span>
      <span id="f2562"> It was dreadful. </span>
      <span id="f2563"> Are you ill? </span>
      <span id="f2564"> You have no idea what it was. </span>
      <span id="f2565"> You have no idea what I suffered.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2566">The girl smiled. </span>
      <span id="f2567"> &#34;Dorian,&#34; she answered, lingering over his name with long-drawn music in her voice, as though it were sweeter than honey to the red petals of her mouth. </span>
      <span id="f2568"> &#34;Dorian, you should have understood. </span>
      <span id="f2569"> But you understand now, don&#39;t you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2570">&#34;Understand what?&#34; he asked, angrily.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2571">&#34;Why I was so bad to-night. </span>
      <span id="f2572">Why I shall always be bad. </span>
      <span id="f2573"> Why I shall never act well again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2574">He shrugged his shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f2575"> &#34;You are ill, I suppose. </span>
      <span id="f2576"> When you are ill you shouldn&#39;t act. </span>
      <span id="f2577"> You make yourself ridiculous. </span>
      <span id="f2578"> My friends were bored. </span>
      <span id="f2579"> I was bored.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2580">She seemed not to listen to him. </span>
      <span id="f2581"> She was transfigured with joy. </span>
      <span id="f2582"> An ecstasy of happiness dominated her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2583">&#34;Dorian, Dorian,&#34; she cried, &#34;before I knew you, acting was the one reality of my life. </span>
      <span id="f2584"> It was only in the theatre that I lived. </span>
      <span id="f2585"> I thought that it was all true. </span>
      <span id="f2586"> I was Rosalind one night and Portia the other. </span>
      <span id="f2587"> The joy of Beatrice was my joy, and the sorrows of Cordelia were mine also. </span>
      <span id="f2588"> I believed in everything. </span>
      <span id="f2589"> The common people who acted with me seemed to me to be godlike. </span>
      <span id="f2590"> The painted scenes were my world. </span>
      <span id="f2591">I knew nothing but shadows, and I thought them real. </span>
      <span id="f2592"> You came--oh, my beautiful love!--and you freed my soul from prison. </span>
      <span id="f2593"> You taught me what reality really is. </span>
      <span id="f2594"> To-night, for the first time in my life, I saw through the hollowness, the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in which I had always played. </span>
      <span id="f2595"> To-night, for the first time, I became conscious that the Romeo was hideous, and old, and painted, that the moonlight in the orchard was false, that the scenery was vulgar, and that the words I had to speak were unreal, were not my words, were not what I wanted to say. </span>
      <span id="f2596"> You had brought me something higher, something of which all art is but a reflection. </span>
      <span id="f2597"> You had made me understand what love really is. </span>
      <span id="f2598"> My love! </span>
      <span id="f2599"> My love! </span>
      <span id="f2600"> Prince Charming! </span>
      <span id="f2601"> Prince of life! </span>
      <span id="f2602">I have grown sick of shadows. </span>
      <span id="f2603"> You are more to me than all art can ever be. </span>
      <span id="f2604"> What have I to do with the puppets of a play? </span>
      <span id="f2605"> When I came on to-night, I could not understand how it was that everything had gone from me. </span>
      <span id="f2606"> I thought that I was going to be wonderful. </span>
      <span id="f2607"> I found that I could do nothing. </span>
      <span id="f2608"> Suddenly it dawned on my soul what it all meant. </span>
      <span id="f2609">The knowledge was exquisite to me. </span>
      <span id="f2610"> I heard them hissing, and I smiled. </span>
      <span id="f2611">What could they know of love such as ours? </span>
      <span id="f2612"> Take me away, Dorian--take me away with you, where we can be quite alone. </span>
      <span id="f2613"> I hate the stage. </span>
      <span id="f2614"> I might mimic a passion that I do not feel, but I cannot mimic one that burns me like fire. </span>
      <span id="f2615"> Oh, Dorian, Dorian, you understand now what it signifies? </span>
      <span id="f2616"> Even if I could do it, it would be profanation for me to play at being in love. </span>
      <span id="f2617"> You have made me see that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2618">He flung himself down on the sofa and turned away his face. </span>
      <span id="f2619"> &#34;You have killed my love,&#34; he muttered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2620">She looked at him in wonder and laughed. </span>
      <span id="f2621"> He made no answer. </span>
      <span id="f2622"> She came across to him, and with her little fingers stroked his hair. </span>
      <span id="f2623"> She knelt down and pressed his hands to her lips. </span>
      <span id="f2624"> He drew them away, and a shudder ran through him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2625">Then he leaped up and went to the door. </span>
      <span id="f2626"> &#34;Yes,&#34; he cried, &#34;you have killed my love. </span>
      <span id="f2627"> You used to stir my imagination. </span>
      <span id="f2628"> Now you don&#39;t even stir my curiosity. </span>
      <span id="f2629"> You simply produce no effect. </span>
      <span id="f2630"> I loved you because you were marvellous, because you had genius and intellect, because you realized the dreams of great poets and gave shape and substance to the shadows of art. </span>
      <span id="f2631"> You have thrown it all away. </span>
      <span id="f2632"> You are shallow and stupid. </span>
      <span id="f2633"> My God! </span>
      <span id="f2634">how mad I was to love you! </span>
      <span id="f2635"> What a fool I have been! </span>
      <span id="f2636">You are nothing to me now. </span>
      <span id="f2637"> I will never see you again. </span>
      <span id="f2638"> I will never think of you. </span>
      <span id="f2639"> I will never mention your name. </span>
      <span id="f2640"> You don&#39;t know what you were to me, once. </span>
      <span id="f2641"> Why, once ... </span>
      <span id="f2642">Oh, I can&#39;t bear to think of it! </span>
      <span id="f2643"> I wish I had never laid eyes upon you! </span>
      <span id="f2644"> You have spoiled the romance of my life. </span>
      <span id="f2645"> How little you can know of love, if you say it mars your art! </span>
      <span id="f2646">Without your art, you are nothing. </span>
      <span id="f2647"> I would have made you famous, splendid, magnificent. </span>
      <span id="f2648"> The world would have worshipped you, and you would have borne my name. </span>
      <span id="f2649"> What are you now? </span>
      <span id="f2650"> A third-rate actress with a pretty face.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2651">The girl grew white, and trembled. </span>
      <span id="f2652"> She clenched her hands together, and her voice seemed to catch in her throat. </span>
      <span id="f2653"> &#34;You are not serious, Dorian?&#34; she murmured. </span>
      <span id="f2654"> &#34;You are acting.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2655">&#34;Acting! </span>
      <span id="f2656"> I leave that to you. </span>
      <span id="f2657"> You do it so well,&#34; he answered bitterly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2658">She rose from her knees and, with a piteous expression of pain in her face, came across the room to him. </span>
      <span id="f2659"> She put her hand upon his arm and looked into his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f2660"> He thrust her back. </span>
      <span id="f2661"> &#34;Don&#39;t touch me!&#34; he cried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2662">A low moan broke from her, and she flung herself at his feet and lay there like a trampled flower. </span>
      <span id="f2663"> &#34;Dorian, Dorian, don&#39;t leave me!&#34; she whispered. </span>
      <span id="f2664"> &#34;I am so sorry I didn&#39;t act well. </span>
      <span id="f2665"> I was thinking of you all the time. </span>
      <span id="f2666"> But I will try--indeed, I will try. </span>
      <span id="f2667"> It came so suddenly across me, my love for you. </span>
      <span id="f2668"> I think I should never have known it if you had not kissed me--if we had not kissed each other. </span>
      <span id="f2669"> Kiss me again, my love. </span>
      <span id="f2670"> Don&#39;t go away from me. </span>
      <span id="f2671"> I couldn&#39;t bear it. </span>
      <span id="f2672"> Oh! </span>
      <span id="f2673">don&#39;t go away from me. </span>
      <span id="f2674"> My brother ... </span>
      <span id="f2675">No; never mind. </span>
      <span id="f2676"> He didn&#39;t mean it. </span>
      <span id="f2677"> He was in jest.... </span>
      <span id="f2678">But you, oh! </span>
      <span id="f2679">can&#39;t you forgive me for to-night? </span>
      <span id="f2680">I will work so hard and try to improve. </span>
      <span id="f2681"> Don&#39;t be cruel to me, because I love you better than anything in the world. </span>
      <span id="f2682"> After all, it is only once that I have not pleased you. </span>
      <span id="f2683"> But you are quite right, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f2684"> I should have shown myself more of an artist. </span>
      <span id="f2685"> It was foolish of me, and yet I couldn&#39;t help it. </span>
      <span id="f2686"> Oh, don&#39;t leave me, don&#39;t leave me.&#34; A fit of passionate sobbing choked her. </span>
      <span id="f2687"> She crouched on the floor like a wounded thing, and Dorian Gray, with his beautiful eyes, looked down at her, and his chiselled lips curled in exquisite disdain. </span>
      <span id="f2688"> There is always something ridiculous about the emotions of people whom one has ceased to love. </span>
      <span id="f2689"> Sibyl Vane seemed to him to be absurdly melodramatic. </span>
      <span id="f2690">Her tears and sobs annoyed him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2691">&#34;I am going,&#34; he said at last in his calm clear voice. </span>
      <span id="f2692"> &#34;I don&#39;t wish to be unkind, but I can&#39;t see you again. </span>
      <span id="f2693"> You have disappointed me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2694">She wept silently, and made no answer, but crept nearer. </span>
      <span id="f2695"> Her little hands stretched blindly out, and appeared to be seeking for him. </span>
      <span id="f2696"> He turned on his heel and left the room. </span>
      <span id="f2697"> In a few moments he was out of the theatre.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2698">Where he went to he hardly knew. </span>
      <span id="f2699"> He remembered wandering through dimly lit streets, past gaunt, black-shadowed archways and evil-looking houses. </span>
      <span id="f2700"> Women with hoarse voices and harsh laughter had called after him. </span>
      <span id="f2701"> Drunkards had reeled by, cursing and chattering to themselves like monstrous apes. </span>
      <span id="f2702"> He had seen grotesque children huddled upon door-steps, and heard shrieks and oaths from gloomy courts.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2703">As the dawn was just breaking, he found himself close to Covent Garden. </span>
      <span id="f2704">The darkness lifted, and, flushed with faint fires, the sky hollowed itself into a perfect pearl. </span>
      <span id="f2705"> Huge carts filled with nodding lilies rumbled slowly down the polished empty street. </span>
      <span id="f2706"> The air was heavy with the perfume of the flowers, and their beauty seemed to bring him an anodyne for his pain. </span>
      <span id="f2707"> He followed into the market and watched the men unloading their waggons. </span>
      <span id="f2708"> A white-smocked carter offered him some cherries. </span>
      <span id="f2709"> He thanked him, wondered why he refused to accept any money for them, and began to eat them listlessly. </span>
      <span id="f2710"> They had been plucked at midnight, and the coldness of the moon had entered into them. </span>
      <span id="f2711"> A long line of boys carrying crates of striped tulips, and of yellow and red roses, defiled in front of him, threading their way through the huge, jade-green piles of vegetables. </span>
      <span id="f2712"> Under the portico, with its grey, sun-bleached pillars, loitered a troop of draggled bareheaded girls, waiting for the auction to be over. </span>
      <span id="f2713"> Others crowded round the swinging doors of the coffee-house in the piazza. </span>
      <span id="f2714"> The heavy cart-horses slipped and stamped upon the rough stones, shaking their bells and trappings. </span>
      <span id="f2715">Some of the drivers were lying asleep on a pile of sacks. </span>
      <span id="f2716"> Iris-necked and pink-footed, the pigeons ran about picking up seeds.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2717">After a little while, he hailed a hansom and drove home. </span>
      <span id="f2718"> For a few moments he loitered upon the doorstep, looking round at the silent square, with its blank, close-shuttered windows and its staring blinds. </span>
      <span id="f2719">The sky was pure opal now, and the roofs of the houses glistened like silver against it. </span>
      <span id="f2720"> From some chimney opposite a thin wreath of smoke was rising. </span>
      <span id="f2721"> It curled, a violet riband, through the nacre-coloured air.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2722">In the huge gilt Venetian lantern, spoil of some Doge&#39;s barge, that hung from the ceiling of the great, oak-panelled hall of entrance, lights were still burning from three flickering jets: thin blue petals of flame they seemed, rimmed with white fire. </span>
      <span id="f2723"> He turned them out and, having thrown his hat and cape on the table, passed through the library towards the door of his bedroom, a large octagonal chamber on the ground floor that, in his new-born feeling for luxury, he had just had decorated for himself and hung with some curious Renaissance tapestries that had been discovered stored in a disused attic at Selby Royal. </span>
      <span id="f2724"> As he was turning the handle of the door, his eye fell upon the portrait Basil Hallward had painted of him. </span>
      <span id="f2725"> He started back as if in surprise. </span>
      <span id="f2726">Then he went on into his own room, looking somewhat puzzled. </span>
      <span id="f2727"> After he had taken the button-hole out of his coat, he seemed to hesitate. </span>
      <span id="f2728">Finally, he came back, went over to the picture, and examined it. </span>
      <span id="f2729"> In the dim arrested light that struggled through the cream-coloured silk blinds, the face appeared to him to be a little changed. </span>
      <span id="f2730"> The expression looked different. </span>
      <span id="f2731"> One would have said that there was a touch of cruelty in the mouth. </span>
      <span id="f2732"> It was certainly strange.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2733">He turned round and, walking to the window, drew up the blind. </span>
      <span id="f2734"> The bright dawn flooded the room and swept the fantastic shadows into dusky corners, where they lay shuddering. </span>
      <span id="f2735"> But the strange expression that he had noticed in the face of the portrait seemed to linger there, to be more intensified even. </span>
      <span id="f2736"> The quivering ardent sunlight showed him the lines of cruelty round the mouth as clearly as if he had been looking into a mirror after he had done some dreadful thing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2737">He winced and, taking up from the table an oval glass framed in ivory Cupids, one of Lord Henry&#39;s many presents to him, glanced hurriedly into its polished depths. </span>
      <span id="f2738"> No line like that warped his red lips. </span>
      <span id="f2739"> What did it mean?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2740">He rubbed his eyes, and came close to the picture, and examined it again. </span>
      <span id="f2741"> There were no signs of any change when he looked into the actual painting, and yet there was no doubt that the whole expression had altered. </span>
      <span id="f2742"> It was not a mere fancy of his own. </span>
      <span id="f2743"> The thing was horribly apparent.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2744">He threw himself into a chair and began to think. </span>
      <span id="f2745"> Suddenly there flashed across his mind what he had said in Basil Hallward&#39;s studio the day the picture had been finished. </span>
      <span id="f2746"> Yes, he remembered it perfectly. </span>
      <span id="f2747">He had uttered a mad wish that he himself might remain young, and the portrait grow old; that his own beauty might be untarnished, and the face on the canvas bear the burden of his passions and his sins; that the painted image might be seared with the lines of suffering and thought, and that he might keep all the delicate bloom and loveliness of his then just conscious boyhood. </span>
      <span id="f2748"> Surely his wish had not been fulfilled? </span>
      <span id="f2749"> Such things were impossible. </span>
      <span id="f2750"> It seemed monstrous even to think of them. </span>
      <span id="f2751"> And, yet, there was the picture before him, with the touch of cruelty in the mouth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2752">Cruelty! </span>
      <span id="f2753"> Had he been cruel? </span>
      <span id="f2754"> It was the girl&#39;s fault, not his. </span>
      <span id="f2755"> He had dreamed of her as a great artist, had given his love to her because he had thought her great. </span>
      <span id="f2756"> Then she had disappointed him. </span>
      <span id="f2757"> She had been shallow and unworthy. </span>
      <span id="f2758"> And, yet, a feeling of infinite regret came over him, as he thought of her lying at his feet sobbing like a little child. </span>
      <span id="f2759"> He remembered with what callousness he had watched her. </span>
      <span id="f2760"> Why had he been made like that? </span>
      <span id="f2761"> Why had such a soul been given to him? </span>
      <span id="f2762">But he had suffered also. </span>
      <span id="f2763"> During the three terrible hours that the play had lasted, he had lived centuries of pain, aeon upon aeon of torture. </span>
      <span id="f2764"> His life was well worth hers. </span>
      <span id="f2765"> She had marred him for a moment, if he had wounded her for an age. </span>
      <span id="f2766"> Besides, women were better suited to bear sorrow than men. </span>
      <span id="f2767"> They lived on their emotions. </span>
      <span id="f2768"> They only thought of their emotions. </span>
      <span id="f2769"> When they took lovers, it was merely to have some one with whom they could have scenes. </span>
      <span id="f2770"> Lord Henry had told him that, and Lord Henry knew what women were. </span>
      <span id="f2771"> Why should he trouble about Sibyl Vane? </span>
      <span id="f2772"> She was nothing to him now.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2773">But the picture? </span>
      <span id="f2774"> What was he to say of that? </span>
      <span id="f2775"> It held the secret of his life, and told his story. </span>
      <span id="f2776"> It had taught him to love his own beauty. </span>
      <span id="f2777"> Would it teach him to loathe his own soul? </span>
      <span id="f2778"> Would he ever look at it again?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2779">No; it was merely an illusion wrought on the troubled senses. </span>
      <span id="f2780"> The horrible night that he had passed had left phantoms behind it. </span>
      <span id="f2781">Suddenly there had fallen upon his brain that tiny scarlet speck that makes men mad. </span>
      <span id="f2782"> The picture had not changed. </span>
      <span id="f2783"> It was folly to think so.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2784">Yet it was watching him, with its beautiful marred face and its cruel smile. </span>
      <span id="f2785"> Its bright hair gleamed in the early sunlight. </span>
      <span id="f2786"> Its blue eyes met his own. </span>
      <span id="f2787"> A sense of infinite pity, not for himself, but for the painted image of himself, came over him. </span>
      <span id="f2788"> It had altered already, and would alter more. </span>
      <span id="f2789"> Its gold would wither into grey. </span>
      <span id="f2790"> Its red and white roses would die. </span>
      <span id="f2791"> For every sin that he committed, a stain would fleck and wreck its fairness. </span>
      <span id="f2792"> But he would not sin. </span>
      <span id="f2793"> The picture, changed or unchanged, would be to him the visible emblem of conscience. </span>
      <span id="f2794"> He would resist temptation. </span>
      <span id="f2795"> He would not see Lord Henry any more--would not, at any rate, listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in Basil Hallward&#39;s garden had first stirred within him the passion for impossible things. </span>
      <span id="f2796"> He would go back to Sibyl Vane, make her amends, marry her, try to love her again. </span>
      <span id="f2797"> Yes, it was his duty to do so. </span>
      <span id="f2798"> She must have suffered more than he had. </span>
      <span id="f2799"> Poor child! </span>
      <span id="f2800"> He had been selfish and cruel to her. </span>
      <span id="f2801"> The fascination that she had exercised over him would return. </span>
      <span id="f2802"> They would be happy together. </span>
      <span id="f2803"> His life with her would be beautiful and pure.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2804">He got up from his chair and drew a large screen right in front of the portrait, shuddering as he glanced at it. </span>
      <span id="f2805"> &#34;How horrible!&#34; he murmured to himself, and he walked across to the window and opened it. </span>
      <span id="f2806"> When he stepped out on to the grass, he drew a deep breath. </span>
      <span id="f2807"> The fresh morning air seemed to drive away all his sombre passions. </span>
      <span id="f2808"> He thought only of Sibyl. </span>
      <span id="f2809"> A faint echo of his love came back to him. </span>
      <span id="f2810"> He repeated her name over and over again. </span>
      <span id="f2811"> The birds that were singing in the dew-drenched garden seemed to be telling the flowers about her.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>