<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f2812">CHAPTER 8</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f2813">It was long past noon when he awoke. </span>
      <span id="f2814"> His valet had crept several times on tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring, and had wondered what made his young master sleep so late. </span>
      <span id="f2815"> Finally his bell sounded, and Victor came in softly with a cup of tea, and a pile of letters, on a small tray of old Sevres china, and drew back the olive-satin curtains, with their shimmering blue lining, that hung in front of the three tall windows.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2816">&#34;Monsieur has well slept this morning,&#34; he said, smiling.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2817">&#34;What o&#39;clock is it, Victor?&#34; asked Dorian Gray drowsily.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2818">&#34;One hour and a quarter, Monsieur.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2819">How late it was! </span>
      <span id="f2820"> He sat up, and having sipped some tea, turned over his letters. </span>
      <span id="f2821"> One of them was from Lord Henry, and had been brought by hand that morning. </span>
      <span id="f2822"> He hesitated for a moment, and then put it aside. </span>
      <span id="f2823">The others he opened listlessly. </span>
      <span id="f2824"> They contained the usual collection of cards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private views, programmes of charity concerts, and the like that are showered on fashionable young men every morning during the season. </span>
      <span id="f2825"> There was a rather heavy bill for a chased silver Louis-Quinze toilet-set that he had not yet had the courage to send on to his guardians, who were extremely old-fashioned people and did not realize that we live in an age when unnecessary things are our only necessities; and there were several very courteously worded communications from Jermyn Street money-lenders offering to advance any sum of money at a moment&#39;s notice and at the most reasonable rates of interest.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2826">After about ten minutes he got up, and throwing on an elaborate dressing-gown of silk-embroidered cashmere wool, passed into the onyx-paved bathroom. </span>
      <span id="f2827"> The cool water refreshed him after his long sleep. </span>
      <span id="f2828"> He seemed to have forgotten all that he had gone through. </span>
      <span id="f2829"> A dim sense of having taken part in some strange tragedy came to him once or twice, but there was the unreality of a dream about it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2830">As soon as he was dressed, he went into the library and sat down to a light French breakfast that had been laid out for him on a small round table close to the open window. </span>
      <span id="f2831"> It was an exquisite day. </span>
      <span id="f2832"> The warm air seemed laden with spices. </span>
      <span id="f2833"> A bee flew in and buzzed round the blue-dragon bowl that, filled with sulphur-yellow roses, stood before him. </span>
      <span id="f2834"> He felt perfectly happy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2835">Suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he had placed in front of the portrait, and he started.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2836">&#34;Too cold for Monsieur?&#34; asked his valet, putting an omelette on the table. </span>
      <span id="f2837"> &#34;I shut the window?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2838">Dorian shook his head. </span>
      <span id="f2839"> &#34;I am not cold,&#34; he murmured.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2840">Was it all true? </span>
      <span id="f2841"> Had the portrait really changed? </span>
      <span id="f2842"> Or had it been simply his own imagination that had made him see a look of evil where there had been a look of joy? </span>
      <span id="f2843"> Surely a painted canvas could not alter? </span>
      <span id="f2844">The thing was absurd. </span>
      <span id="f2845"> It would serve as a tale to tell Basil some day. </span>
      <span id="f2846">It would make him smile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2847">And, yet, how vivid was his recollection of the whole thing! </span>
      <span id="f2848"> First in the dim twilight, and then in the bright dawn, he had seen the touch of cruelty round the warped lips. </span>
      <span id="f2849"> He almost dreaded his valet leaving the room. </span>
      <span id="f2850"> He knew that when he was alone he would have to examine the portrait. </span>
      <span id="f2851"> He was afraid of certainty. </span>
      <span id="f2852"> When the coffee and cigarettes had been brought and the man turned to go, he felt a wild desire to tell him to remain. </span>
      <span id="f2853"> As the door was closing behind him, he called him back. </span>
      <span id="f2854"> The man stood waiting for his orders. </span>
      <span id="f2855"> Dorian looked at him for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f2856"> &#34;I am not at home to any one, Victor,&#34; he said with a sigh. </span>
      <span id="f2857">The man bowed and retired.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2858">Then he rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and flung himself down on a luxuriously cushioned couch that stood facing the screen. </span>
      <span id="f2859"> The screen was an old one, of gilt Spanish leather, stamped and wrought with a rather florid Louis-Quatorze pattern. </span>
      <span id="f2860"> He scanned it curiously, wondering if ever before it had concealed the secret of a man&#39;s life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2861">Should he move it aside, after all? </span>
      <span id="f2862"> Why not let it stay there? </span>
      <span id="f2863"> What was the use of knowing? </span>
      <span id="f2864">If the thing was true, it was terrible. </span>
      <span id="f2865"> If it was not true, why trouble about it? </span>
      <span id="f2866"> But what if, by some fate or deadlier chance, eyes other than his spied behind and saw the horrible change? </span>
      <span id="f2867"> What should he do if Basil Hallward came and asked to look at his own picture? </span>
      <span id="f2868"> Basil would be sure to do that. </span>
      <span id="f2869"> No; the thing had to be examined, and at once. </span>
      <span id="f2870"> Anything would be better than this dreadful state of doubt.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2871">He got up and locked both doors. </span>
      <span id="f2872"> At least he would be alone when he looked upon the mask of his shame. </span>
      <span id="f2873"> Then he drew the screen aside and saw himself face to face. </span>
      <span id="f2874"> It was perfectly true. </span>
      <span id="f2875"> The portrait had altered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2876">As he often remembered afterwards, and always with no small wonder, he found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling of almost scientific interest. </span>
      <span id="f2877"> That such a change should have taken place was incredible to him. </span>
      <span id="f2878"> And yet it was a fact. </span>
      <span id="f2879"> Was there some subtle affinity between the chemical atoms that shaped themselves into form and colour on the canvas and the soul that was within him? </span>
      <span id="f2880"> Could it be that what that soul thought, they realized?--that what it dreamed, they made true? </span>
      <span id="f2881"> Or was there some other, more terrible reason? </span>
      <span id="f2882"> He shuddered, and felt afraid, and, going back to the couch, lay there, gazing at the picture in sickened horror.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2883">One thing, however, he felt that it had done for him. </span>
      <span id="f2884"> It had made him conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been to Sibyl Vane. </span>
      <span id="f2885"> It was not too late to make reparation for that. </span>
      <span id="f2886"> She could still be his wife. </span>
      <span id="f2887">His unreal and selfish love would yield to some higher influence, would be transformed into some nobler passion, and the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him would be a guide to him through life, would be to him what holiness is to some, and conscience to others, and the fear of God to us all. </span>
      <span id="f2888"> There were opiates for remorse, drugs that could lull the moral sense to sleep. </span>
      <span id="f2889"> But here was a visible symbol of the degradation of sin. </span>
      <span id="f2890"> Here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men brought upon their souls.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2891">Three o&#39;clock struck, and four, and the half-hour rang its double chime, but Dorian Gray did not stir. </span>
      <span id="f2892"> He was trying to gather up the scarlet threads of life and to weave them into a pattern; to find his way through the sanguine labyrinth of passion through which he was wandering. </span>
      <span id="f2893"> He did not know what to do, or what to think. </span>
      <span id="f2894"> Finally, he went over to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the girl he had loved, imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness. </span>
      <span id="f2895"> He covered page after page with wild words of sorrow and wilder words of pain. </span>
      <span id="f2896"> There is a luxury in self-reproach. </span>
      <span id="f2897">When we blame ourselves, we feel that no one else has a right to blame us. </span>
      <span id="f2898"> It is the confession, not the priest, that gives us absolution. </span>
      <span id="f2899"> When Dorian had finished the letter, he felt that he had been forgiven.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2900">Suddenly there came a knock to the door, and he heard Lord Henry&#39;s voice outside. </span>
      <span id="f2901"> &#34;My dear boy, I must see you. </span>
      <span id="f2902"> Let me in at once. </span>
      <span id="f2903"> I can&#39;t bear your shutting yourself up like this.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2904">He made no answer at first, but remained quite still. </span>
      <span id="f2905"> The knocking still continued and grew louder. </span>
      <span id="f2906"> Yes, it was better to let Lord Henry in, and to explain to him the new life he was going to lead, to quarrel with him if it became necessary to quarrel, to part if parting was inevitable. </span>
      <span id="f2907"> He jumped up, drew the screen hastily across the picture, and unlocked the door.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2908">&#34;I am so sorry for it all, Dorian,&#34; said Lord Henry as he entered. </span>
      <span id="f2909">&#34;But you must not think too much about it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2910">&#34;Do you mean about Sibyl Vane?&#34; asked the lad.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2911">&#34;Yes, of course,&#34; answered Lord Henry, sinking into a chair and slowly pulling off his yellow gloves. </span>
      <span id="f2912"> &#34;It is dreadful, from one point of view, but it was not your fault. </span>
      <span id="f2913"> Tell me, did you go behind and see her, after the play was over?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2914">&#34;Yes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2915">&#34;I felt sure you had. </span>
      <span id="f2916"> Did you make a scene with her?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2917">&#34;I was brutal, Harry--perfectly brutal. </span>
      <span id="f2918"> But it is all right now. </span>
      <span id="f2919"> I am not sorry for anything that has happened. </span>
      <span id="f2920"> It has taught me to know myself better.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2921">&#34;Ah, Dorian, I am so glad you take it in that way! </span>
      <span id="f2922"> I was afraid I would find you plunged in remorse and tearing that nice curly hair of yours.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2923">&#34;I have got through all that,&#34; said Dorian, shaking his head and smiling. </span>
      <span id="f2924"> &#34;I am perfectly happy now. </span>
      <span id="f2925"> I know what conscience is, to begin with. </span>
      <span id="f2926"> It is not what you told me it was. </span>
      <span id="f2927"> It is the divinest thing in us. </span>
      <span id="f2928"> Don&#39;t sneer at it, Harry, any more--at least not before me. </span>
      <span id="f2929"> I want to be good. </span>
      <span id="f2930"> I can&#39;t bear the idea of my soul being hideous.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2931">&#34;A very charming artistic basis for ethics, Dorian! </span>
      <span id="f2932"> I congratulate you on it. </span>
      <span id="f2933"> But how are you going to begin?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2934">&#34;By marrying Sibyl Vane.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2935">&#34;Marrying Sibyl Vane!&#34; cried Lord Henry, standing up and looking at him in perplexed amazement. </span>
      <span id="f2936"> &#34;But, my dear Dorian--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2937">&#34;Yes, Harry, I know what you are going to say. </span>
      <span id="f2938"> Something dreadful about marriage. </span>
      <span id="f2939"> Don&#39;t say it. </span>
      <span id="f2940"> Don&#39;t ever say things of that kind to me again. </span>
      <span id="f2941"> Two days ago I asked Sibyl to marry me. </span>
      <span id="f2942"> I am not going to break my word to her. </span>
      <span id="f2943"> She is to be my wife.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2944">&#34;Your wife! </span>
      <span id="f2945"> Dorian! </span>
      <span id="f2946">... </span>
      <span id="f2947">Didn&#39;t you get my letter? </span>
      <span id="f2948"> I wrote to you this morning, and sent the note down by my own man.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2949">&#34;Your letter? </span>
      <span id="f2950"> Oh, yes, I remember. </span>
      <span id="f2951"> I have not read it yet, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f2952"> I was afraid there might be something in it that I wouldn&#39;t like. </span>
      <span id="f2953"> You cut life to pieces with your epigrams.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2954">&#34;You know nothing then?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2955">&#34;What do you mean?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2956">Lord Henry walked across the room, and sitting down by Dorian Gray, took both his hands in his own and held them tightly. </span>
      <span id="f2957"> &#34;Dorian,&#34; he said, &#34;my letter--don&#39;t be frightened--was to tell you that Sibyl Vane is dead.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2958">A cry of pain broke from the lad&#39;s lips, and he leaped to his feet, tearing his hands away from Lord Henry&#39;s grasp. </span>
      <span id="f2959"> &#34;Dead! </span>
      <span id="f2960"> Sibyl dead! </span>
      <span id="f2961">It is not true! </span>
      <span id="f2962"> It is a horrible lie! </span>
      <span id="f2963"> How dare you say it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2964">&#34;It is quite true, Dorian,&#34; said Lord Henry, gravely. </span>
      <span id="f2965"> &#34;It is in all the morning papers. </span>
      <span id="f2966"> I wrote down to you to ask you not to see any one till I came. </span>
      <span id="f2967"> There will have to be an inquest, of course, and you must not be mixed up in it. </span>
      <span id="f2968"> Things like that make a man fashionable in Paris. </span>
      <span id="f2969"> But in London people are so prejudiced. </span>
      <span id="f2970"> Here, one should never make one&#39;s _debut_ with a scandal. </span>
      <span id="f2971"> One should reserve that to give an interest to one&#39;s old age. </span>
      <span id="f2972"> I suppose they don&#39;t know your name at the theatre? </span>
      <span id="f2973"> If they don&#39;t, it is all right. </span>
      <span id="f2974"> Did any one see you going round to her room? </span>
      <span id="f2975"> That is an important point.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2976">Dorian did not answer for a few moments. </span>
      <span id="f2977"> He was dazed with horror. </span>
      <span id="f2978">Finally he stammered, in a stifled voice, &#34;Harry, did you say an inquest? </span>
      <span id="f2979"> What did you mean by that? </span>
      <span id="f2980"> Did Sibyl--? </span>
      <span id="f2981">Oh, Harry, I can&#39;t bear it! </span>
      <span id="f2982"> But be quick. </span>
      <span id="f2983"> Tell me everything at once.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2984">&#34;I have no doubt it was not an accident, Dorian, though it must be put in that way to the public. </span>
      <span id="f2985"> It seems that as she was leaving the theatre with her mother, about half-past twelve or so, she said she had forgotten something upstairs. </span>
      <span id="f2986"> They waited some time for her, but she did not come down again. </span>
      <span id="f2987"> They ultimately found her lying dead on the floor of her dressing-room. </span>
      <span id="f2988">She had swallowed something by mistake, some dreadful thing they use at theatres. </span>
      <span id="f2989"> I don&#39;t know what it was, but it had either prussic acid or white lead in it. </span>
      <span id="f2990"> I should fancy it was prussic acid, as she seems to have died instantaneously.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2991">&#34;Harry, Harry, it is terrible!&#34; cried the lad.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f2992">&#34;Yes; it is very tragic, of course, but you must not get yourself mixed up in it. </span>
      <span id="f2993"> I see by _The Standard_ that she was seventeen. </span>
      <span id="f2994"> I should have thought she was almost younger than that. </span>
      <span id="f2995"> She looked such a child, and seemed to know so little about acting. </span>
      <span id="f2996"> Dorian, you mustn&#39;t let this thing get on your nerves. </span>
      <span id="f2997"> You must come and dine with me, and afterwards we will look in at the opera. </span>
      <span id="f2998"> It is a Patti night, and everybody will be there. </span>
      <span id="f2999"> You can come to my sister&#39;s box. </span>
      <span id="f3000"> She has got some smart women with her.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3001">&#34;So I have murdered Sibyl Vane,&#34; said Dorian Gray, half to himself, &#34;murdered her as surely as if I had cut her little throat with a knife. </span>
      <span id="f3002">Yet the roses are not less lovely for all that. </span>
      <span id="f3003"> The birds sing just as happily in my garden. </span>
      <span id="f3004"> And to-night I am to dine with you, and then go on to the opera, and sup somewhere, I suppose, afterwards. </span>
      <span id="f3005"> How extraordinarily dramatic life is! </span>
      <span id="f3006"> If I had read all this in a book, Harry, I think I would have wept over it. </span>
      <span id="f3007"> Somehow, now that it has happened actually, and to me, it seems far too wonderful for tears. </span>
      <span id="f3008">Here is the first passionate love-letter I have ever written in my life. </span>
      <span id="f3009"> Strange, that my first passionate love-letter should have been addressed to a dead girl. </span>
      <span id="f3010"> Can they feel, I wonder, those white silent people we call the dead? </span>
      <span id="f3011"> Sibyl! </span>
      <span id="f3012"> Can she feel, or know, or listen? </span>
      <span id="f3013">Oh, Harry, how I loved her once! </span>
      <span id="f3014"> It seems years ago to me now. </span>
      <span id="f3015"> She was everything to me. </span>
      <span id="f3016"> Then came that dreadful night--was it really only last night?--when she played so badly, and my heart almost broke. </span>
      <span id="f3017">She explained it all to me. </span>
      <span id="f3018"> It was terribly pathetic. </span>
      <span id="f3019"> But I was not moved a bit. </span>
      <span id="f3020"> I thought her shallow. </span>
      <span id="f3021"> Suddenly something happened that made me afraid. </span>
      <span id="f3022"> I can&#39;t tell you what it was, but it was terrible. </span>
      <span id="f3023"> I said I would go back to her. </span>
      <span id="f3024"> I felt I had done wrong. </span>
      <span id="f3025"> And now she is dead. </span>
      <span id="f3026"> My God! </span>
      <span id="f3027"> My God! </span>
      <span id="f3028"> Harry, what shall I do? </span>
      <span id="f3029"> You don&#39;t know the danger I am in, and there is nothing to keep me straight. </span>
      <span id="f3030"> She would have done that for me. </span>
      <span id="f3031"> She had no right to kill herself. </span>
      <span id="f3032"> It was selfish of her.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3033">&#34;My dear Dorian,&#34; answered Lord Henry, taking a cigarette from his case and producing a gold-latten matchbox, &#34;the only way a woman can ever reform a man is by boring him so completely that he loses all possible interest in life. </span>
      <span id="f3034"> If you had married this girl, you would have been wretched. </span>
      <span id="f3035"> Of course, you would have treated her kindly. </span>
      <span id="f3036"> One can always be kind to people about whom one cares nothing. </span>
      <span id="f3037"> But she would have soon found out that you were absolutely indifferent to her. </span>
      <span id="f3038"> And when a woman finds that out about her husband, she either becomes dreadfully dowdy, or wears very smart bonnets that some other woman&#39;s husband has to pay for. </span>
      <span id="f3039"> I say nothing about the social mistake, which would have been abject--which, of course, I would not have allowed--but I assure you that in any case the whole thing would have been an absolute failure.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3040">&#34;I suppose it would,&#34; muttered the lad, walking up and down the room and looking horribly pale. </span>
      <span id="f3041"> &#34;But I thought it was my duty. </span>
      <span id="f3042"> It is not my fault that this terrible tragedy has prevented my doing what was right. </span>
      <span id="f3043"> I remember your saying once that there is a fatality about good resolutions--that they are always made too late. </span>
      <span id="f3044"> Mine certainly were.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3045">&#34;Good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere with scientific laws. </span>
      <span id="f3046"> Their origin is pure vanity. </span>
      <span id="f3047"> Their result is absolutely _nil_. </span>
      <span id="f3048">They give us, now and then, some of those luxurious sterile emotions that have a certain charm for the weak. </span>
      <span id="f3049"> That is all that can be said for them. </span>
      <span id="f3050"> They are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they have no account.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3051">&#34;Harry,&#34; cried Dorian Gray, coming over and sitting down beside him, &#34;why is it that I cannot feel this tragedy as much as I want to? </span>
      <span id="f3052"> I don&#39;t think I am heartless. </span>
      <span id="f3053"> Do you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3054">&#34;You have done too many foolish things during the last fortnight to be entitled to give yourself that name, Dorian,&#34; answered Lord Henry with his sweet melancholy smile.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3055">The lad frowned. </span>
      <span id="f3056"> &#34;I don&#39;t like that explanation, Harry,&#34; he rejoined, &#34;but I am glad you don&#39;t think I am heartless. </span>
      <span id="f3057"> I am nothing of the kind. </span>
      <span id="f3058"> I know I am not. </span>
      <span id="f3059"> And yet I must admit that this thing that has happened does not affect me as it should. </span>
      <span id="f3060"> It seems to me to be simply like a wonderful ending to a wonderful play. </span>
      <span id="f3061"> It has all the terrible beauty of a Greek tragedy, a tragedy in which I took a great part, but by which I have not been wounded.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3062">&#34;It is an interesting question,&#34; said Lord Henry, who found an exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad&#39;s unconscious egotism, &#34;an extremely interesting question. </span>
      <span id="f3063"> I fancy that the true explanation is this:  It often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such an inartistic manner that they hurt us by their crude violence, their absolute incoherence, their absurd want of meaning, their entire lack of style. </span>
      <span id="f3064"> They affect us just as vulgarity affects us. </span>
      <span id="f3065"> They give us an impression of sheer brute force, and we revolt against that. </span>
      <span id="f3066">Sometimes, however, a tragedy that possesses artistic elements of beauty crosses our lives. </span>
      <span id="f3067"> If these elements of beauty are real, the whole thing simply appeals to our sense of dramatic effect. </span>
      <span id="f3068"> Suddenly we find that we are no longer the actors, but the spectators of the play. </span>
      <span id="f3069"> Or rather we are both. </span>
      <span id="f3070"> We watch ourselves, and the mere wonder of the spectacle enthralls us. </span>
      <span id="f3071"> In the present case, what is it that has really happened? </span>
      <span id="f3072"> Some one has killed herself for love of you. </span>
      <span id="f3073"> I wish that I had ever had such an experience. </span>
      <span id="f3074"> It would have made me in love with love for the rest of my life. </span>
      <span id="f3075"> The people who have adored me--there have not been very many, but there have been some--have always insisted on living on, long after I had ceased to care for them, or they to care for me. </span>
      <span id="f3076"> They have become stout and tedious, and when I meet them, they go in at once for reminiscences. </span>
      <span id="f3077"> That awful memory of woman! </span>
      <span id="f3078"> What a fearful thing it is! </span>
      <span id="f3079"> And what an utter intellectual stagnation it reveals! </span>
      <span id="f3080"> One should absorb the colour of life, but one should never remember its details. </span>
      <span id="f3081"> Details are always vulgar.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3082">&#34;I must sow poppies in my garden,&#34; sighed Dorian.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3083">&#34;There is no necessity,&#34; rejoined his companion. </span>
      <span id="f3084"> &#34;Life has always poppies in her hands. </span>
      <span id="f3085"> Of course, now and then things linger. </span>
      <span id="f3086"> I once wore nothing but violets all through one season, as a form of artistic mourning for a romance that would not die. </span>
      <span id="f3087"> Ultimately, however, it did die. </span>
      <span id="f3088"> I forget what killed it. </span>
      <span id="f3089"> I think it was her proposing to sacrifice the whole world for me. </span>
      <span id="f3090"> That is always a dreadful moment. </span>
      <span id="f3091">It fills one with the terror of eternity. </span>
      <span id="f3092"> Well--would you believe it?--a week ago, at Lady Hampshire&#39;s, I found myself seated at dinner next the lady in question, and she insisted on going over the whole thing again, and digging up the past, and raking up the future. </span>
      <span id="f3093"> I had buried my romance in a bed of asphodel. </span>
      <span id="f3094"> She dragged it out again and assured me that I had spoiled her life. </span>
      <span id="f3095"> I am bound to state that she ate an enormous dinner, so I did not feel any anxiety. </span>
      <span id="f3096"> But what a lack of taste she showed! </span>
      <span id="f3097"> The one charm of the past is that it is the past. </span>
      <span id="f3098">But women never know when the curtain has fallen. </span>
      <span id="f3099"> They always want a sixth act, and as soon as the interest of the play is entirely over, they propose to continue it. </span>
      <span id="f3100"> If they were allowed their own way, every comedy would have a tragic ending, and every tragedy would culminate in a farce. </span>
      <span id="f3101"> They are charmingly artificial, but they have no sense of art. </span>
      <span id="f3102"> You are more fortunate than I am. </span>
      <span id="f3103"> I assure you, Dorian, that not one of the women I have known would have done for me what Sibyl Vane did for you. </span>
      <span id="f3104"> Ordinary women always console themselves. </span>
      <span id="f3105"> Some of them do it by going in for sentimental colours. </span>
      <span id="f3106"> Never trust a woman who wears mauve, whatever her age may be, or a woman over thirty-five who is fond of pink ribbons. </span>
      <span id="f3107"> It always means that they have a history. </span>
      <span id="f3108">Others find a great consolation in suddenly discovering the good qualities of their husbands. </span>
      <span id="f3109"> They flaunt their conjugal felicity in one&#39;s face, as if it were the most fascinating of sins. </span>
      <span id="f3110"> Religion consoles some. </span>
      <span id="f3111"> Its mysteries have all the charm of a flirtation, a woman once told me, and I can quite understand it. </span>
      <span id="f3112"> Besides, nothing makes one so vain as being told that one is a sinner. </span>
      <span id="f3113"> Conscience makes egotists of us all. </span>
      <span id="f3114"> Yes; there is really no end to the consolations that women find in modern life. </span>
      <span id="f3115"> Indeed, I have not mentioned the most important one.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3116">&#34;What is that, Harry?&#34; said the lad listlessly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3117">&#34;Oh, the obvious consolation. </span>
      <span id="f3118"> Taking some one else&#39;s admirer when one loses one&#39;s own. </span>
      <span id="f3119"> In good society that always whitewashes a woman. </span>
      <span id="f3120"> But really, Dorian, how different Sibyl Vane must have been from all the women one meets! </span>
      <span id="f3121"> There is something to me quite beautiful about her death. </span>
      <span id="f3122"> I am glad I am living in a century when such wonders happen. </span>
      <span id="f3123">They make one believe in the reality of the things we all play with, such as romance, passion, and love.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3124">&#34;I was terribly cruel to her. </span>
      <span id="f3125"> You forget that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3126">&#34;I am afraid that women appreciate cruelty, downright cruelty, more than anything else. </span>
      <span id="f3127"> They have wonderfully primitive instincts. </span>
      <span id="f3128"> We have emancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their masters, all the same. </span>
      <span id="f3129"> They love being dominated. </span>
      <span id="f3130"> I am sure you were splendid. </span>
      <span id="f3131"> I have never seen you really and absolutely angry, but I can fancy how delightful you looked. </span>
      <span id="f3132"> And, after all, you said something to me the day before yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be merely fanciful, but that I see now was absolutely true, and it holds the key to everything.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3133">&#34;What was that, Harry?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3134">&#34;You said to me that Sibyl Vane represented to you all the heroines of romance--that she was Desdemona one night, and Ophelia the other; that if she died as Juliet, she came to life as Imogen.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3135">&#34;She will never come to life again now,&#34; muttered the lad, burying his face in his hands.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3136">&#34;No, she will never come to life. </span>
      <span id="f3137"> She has played her last part. </span>
      <span id="f3138"> But you must think of that lonely death in the tawdry dressing-room simply as a strange lurid fragment from some Jacobean tragedy, as a wonderful scene from Webster, or Ford, or Cyril Tourneur. </span>
      <span id="f3139"> The girl never really lived, and so she has never really died. </span>
      <span id="f3140"> To you at least she was always a dream, a phantom that flitted through Shakespeare&#39;s plays and left them lovelier for its presence, a reed through which Shakespeare&#39;s music sounded richer and more full of joy. </span>
      <span id="f3141"> The moment she touched actual life, she marred it, and it marred her, and so she passed away. </span>
      <span id="f3142">Mourn for Ophelia, if you like. </span>
      <span id="f3143"> Put ashes on your head because Cordelia was strangled. </span>
      <span id="f3144"> Cry out against Heaven because the daughter of Brabantio died. </span>
      <span id="f3145"> But don&#39;t waste your tears over Sibyl Vane. </span>
      <span id="f3146"> She was less real than they are.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3147">There was a silence. </span>
      <span id="f3148"> The evening darkened in the room. </span>
      <span id="f3149"> Noiselessly, and with silver feet, the shadows crept in from the garden. </span>
      <span id="f3150"> The colours faded wearily out of things.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3151">After some time Dorian Gray looked up. </span>
      <span id="f3152"> &#34;You have explained me to myself, Harry,&#34; he murmured with something of a sigh of relief. </span>
      <span id="f3153"> &#34;I felt all that you have said, but somehow I was afraid of it, and I could not express it to myself. </span>
      <span id="f3154"> How well you know me! </span>
      <span id="f3155"> But we will not talk again of what has happened. </span>
      <span id="f3156"> It has been a marvellous experience. </span>
      <span id="f3157">That is all. </span>
      <span id="f3158"> I wonder if life has still in store for me anything as marvellous.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3159">&#34;Life has everything in store for you, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f3160"> There is nothing that you, with your extraordinary good looks, will not be able to do.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3161">&#34;But suppose, Harry, I became haggard, and old, and wrinkled? </span>
      <span id="f3162"> What then?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3163">&#34;Ah, then,&#34; said Lord Henry, rising to go, &#34;then, my dear Dorian, you would have to fight for your victories. </span>
      <span id="f3164"> As it is, they are brought to you. </span>
      <span id="f3165"> No, you must keep your good looks. </span>
      <span id="f3166"> We live in an age that reads too much to be wise, and that thinks too much to be beautiful. </span>
      <span id="f3167"> We cannot spare you. </span>
      <span id="f3168"> And now you had better dress and drive down to the club. </span>
      <span id="f3169"> We are rather late, as it is.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3170">&#34;I think I shall join you at the opera, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f3171"> I feel too tired to eat anything. </span>
      <span id="f3172"> What is the number of your sister&#39;s box?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3173">&#34;Twenty-seven, I believe. </span>
      <span id="f3174"> It is on the grand tier. </span>
      <span id="f3175"> You will see her name on the door. </span>
      <span id="f3176"> But I am sorry you won&#39;t come and dine.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3177">&#34;I don&#39;t feel up to it,&#34; said Dorian listlessly. </span>
      <span id="f3178"> &#34;But I am awfully obliged to you for all that you have said to me. </span>
      <span id="f3179"> You are certainly my best friend. </span>
      <span id="f3180"> No one has ever understood me as you have.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3181">&#34;We are only at the beginning of our friendship, Dorian,&#34; answered Lord Henry, shaking him by the hand. </span>
      <span id="f3182"> &#34;Good-bye. </span>
      <span id="f3183">I shall see you before nine-thirty, I hope. </span>
      <span id="f3184"> Remember, Patti is singing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3185">As he closed the door behind him, Dorian Gray touched the bell, and in a few minutes Victor appeared with the lamps and drew the blinds down. </span>
      <span id="f3186">He waited impatiently for him to go. </span>
      <span id="f3187"> The man seemed to take an interminable time over everything.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3188">As soon as he had left, he rushed to the screen and drew it back. </span>
      <span id="f3189"> No; there was no further change in the picture. </span>
      <span id="f3190"> It had received the news of Sibyl Vane&#39;s death before he had known of it himself. </span>
      <span id="f3191"> It was conscious of the events of life as they occurred. </span>
      <span id="f3192"> The vicious cruelty that marred the fine lines of the mouth had, no doubt, appeared at the very moment that the girl had drunk the poison, whatever it was. </span>
      <span id="f3193"> Or was it indifferent to results? </span>
      <span id="f3194"> Did it merely take cognizance of what passed within the soul? </span>
      <span id="f3195"> He wondered, and hoped that some day he would see the change taking place before his very eyes, shuddering as he hoped it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3196">Poor Sibyl! </span>
      <span id="f3197"> What a romance it had all been! </span>
      <span id="f3198"> She had often mimicked death on the stage. </span>
      <span id="f3199"> Then Death himself had touched her and taken her with him. </span>
      <span id="f3200"> How had she played that dreadful last scene? </span>
      <span id="f3201"> Had she cursed him, as she died? </span>
      <span id="f3202"> No; she had died for love of him, and love would always be a sacrament to him now. </span>
      <span id="f3203"> She had atoned for everything by the sacrifice she had made of her life. </span>
      <span id="f3204"> He would not think any more of what she had made him go through, on that horrible night at the theatre. </span>
      <span id="f3205"> When he thought of her, it would be as a wonderful tragic figure sent on to the world&#39;s stage to show the supreme reality of love. </span>
      <span id="f3206"> A wonderful tragic figure? </span>
      <span id="f3207"> Tears came to his eyes as he remembered her childlike look, and winsome fanciful ways, and shy tremulous grace. </span>
      <span id="f3208"> He brushed them away hastily and looked again at the picture.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3209">He felt that the time had really come for making his choice. </span>
      <span id="f3210"> Or had his choice already been made? </span>
      <span id="f3211"> Yes, life had decided that for him--life, and his own infinite curiosity about life. </span>
      <span id="f3212"> Eternal youth, infinite passion, pleasures subtle and secret, wild joys and wilder sins--he was to have all these things. </span>
      <span id="f3213"> The portrait was to bear the burden of his shame: that was all.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3214">A feeling of pain crept over him as he thought of the desecration that was in store for the fair face on the canvas. </span>
      <span id="f3215"> Once, in boyish mockery of Narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss, those painted lips that now smiled so cruelly at him. </span>
      <span id="f3216"> Morning after morning he had sat before the portrait wondering at its beauty, almost enamoured of it, as it seemed to him at times. </span>
      <span id="f3217"> Was it to alter now with every mood to which he yielded? </span>
      <span id="f3218"> Was it to become a monstrous and loathsome thing, to be hidden away in a locked room, to be shut out from the sunlight that had so often touched to brighter gold the waving wonder of its hair? </span>
      <span id="f3219">The pity of it! </span>
      <span id="f3220">the pity of it!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3221">For a moment, he thought of praying that the horrible sympathy that existed between him and the picture might cease. </span>
      <span id="f3222"> It had changed in answer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a prayer it might remain unchanged. </span>
      <span id="f3223"> And yet, who, that knew anything about life, would surrender the chance of remaining always young, however fantastic that chance might be, or with what fateful consequences it might be fraught? </span>
      <span id="f3224">Besides, was it really under his control? </span>
      <span id="f3225"> Had it indeed been prayer that had produced the substitution? </span>
      <span id="f3226"> Might there not be some curious scientific reason for it all? </span>
      <span id="f3227"> If thought could exercise its influence upon a living organism, might not thought exercise an influence upon dead and inorganic things? </span>
      <span id="f3228"> Nay, without thought or conscious desire, might not things external to ourselves vibrate in unison with our moods and passions, atom calling to atom in secret love or strange affinity? </span>
      <span id="f3229">But the reason was of no importance. </span>
      <span id="f3230"> He would never again tempt by a prayer any terrible power. </span>
      <span id="f3231"> If the picture was to alter, it was to alter. </span>
      <span id="f3232"> That was all. </span>
      <span id="f3233"> Why inquire too closely into it?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3234">For there would be a real pleasure in watching it. </span>
      <span id="f3235"> He would be able to follow his mind into its secret places. </span>
      <span id="f3236"> This portrait would be to him the most magical of mirrors. </span>
      <span id="f3237"> As it had revealed to him his own body, so it would reveal to him his own soul. </span>
      <span id="f3238"> And when winter came upon it, he would still be standing where spring trembles on the verge of summer. </span>
      <span id="f3239"> When the blood crept from its face, and left behind a pallid mask of chalk with leaden eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood. </span>
      <span id="f3240">Not one blossom of his loveliness would ever fade. </span>
      <span id="f3241"> Not one pulse of his life would ever weaken. </span>
      <span id="f3242"> Like the gods of the Greeks, he would be strong, and fleet, and joyous. </span>
      <span id="f3243"> What did it matter what happened to the coloured image on the canvas? </span>
      <span id="f3244"> He would be safe. </span>
      <span id="f3245"> That was everything.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3246">He drew the screen back into its former place in front of the picture, smiling as he did so, and passed into his bedroom, where his valet was already waiting for him. </span>
      <span id="f3247"> An hour later he was at the opera, and Lord Henry was leaning over his chair.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>