<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER 9</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f3248">CHAPTER 9</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f3249">As he was sitting at breakfast next morning, Basil Hallward was shown into the room.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3250">&#34;I am so glad I have found you, Dorian,&#34; he said gravely. </span>
      <span id="f3251"> &#34;I called last night, and they told me you were at the opera. </span>
      <span id="f3252"> Of course, I knew that was impossible. </span>
      <span id="f3253"> But I wish you had left word where you had really gone to. </span>
      <span id="f3254"> I passed a dreadful evening, half afraid that one tragedy might be followed by another. </span>
      <span id="f3255"> I think you might have telegraphed for me when you heard of it first. </span>
      <span id="f3256"> I read of it quite by chance in a late edition of _The Globe_ that I picked up at the club. </span>
      <span id="f3257"> I came here at once and was miserable at not finding you. </span>
      <span id="f3258"> I can&#39;t tell you how heart-broken I am about the whole thing. </span>
      <span id="f3259"> I know what you must suffer. </span>
      <span id="f3260">But where were you? </span>
      <span id="f3261"> Did you go down and see the girl&#39;s mother? </span>
      <span id="f3262"> For a moment I thought of following you there. </span>
      <span id="f3263"> They gave the address in the paper. </span>
      <span id="f3264"> Somewhere in the Euston Road, isn&#39;t it? </span>
      <span id="f3265"> But I was afraid of intruding upon a sorrow that I could not lighten. </span>
      <span id="f3266"> Poor woman! </span>
      <span id="f3267"> What a state she must be in! </span>
      <span id="f3268"> And her only child, too! </span>
      <span id="f3269"> What did she say about it all?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3270">&#34;My dear Basil, how do I know?&#34; murmured Dorian Gray, sipping some pale-yellow wine from a delicate, gold-beaded bubble of Venetian glass and looking dreadfully bored. </span>
      <span id="f3271"> &#34;I was at the opera. </span>
      <span id="f3272"> You should have come on there. </span>
      <span id="f3273"> I met Lady Gwendolen, Harry&#39;s sister, for the first time. </span>
      <span id="f3274"> We were in her box. </span>
      <span id="f3275"> She is perfectly charming; and Patti sang divinely. </span>
      <span id="f3276"> Don&#39;t talk about horrid subjects. </span>
      <span id="f3277"> If one doesn&#39;t talk about a thing, it has never happened. </span>
      <span id="f3278"> It is simply expression, as Harry says, that gives reality to things. </span>
      <span id="f3279"> I may mention that she was not the woman&#39;s only child. </span>
      <span id="f3280"> There is a son, a charming fellow, I believe. </span>
      <span id="f3281"> But he is not on the stage. </span>
      <span id="f3282"> He is a sailor, or something. </span>
      <span id="f3283"> And now, tell me about yourself and what you are painting.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3284">&#34;You went to the opera?&#34; said Hallward, speaking very slowly and with a strained touch of pain in his voice. </span>
      <span id="f3285"> &#34;You went to the opera while Sibyl Vane was lying dead in some sordid lodging? </span>
      <span id="f3286"> You can talk to me of other women being charming, and of Patti singing divinely, before the girl you loved has even the quiet of a grave to sleep in? </span>
      <span id="f3287"> Why, man, there are horrors in store for that little white body of hers!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3288">&#34;Stop, Basil! </span>
      <span id="f3289"> I won&#39;t hear it!&#34; cried Dorian, leaping to his feet. </span>
      <span id="f3290">&#34;You must not tell me about things. </span>
      <span id="f3291"> What is done is done. </span>
      <span id="f3292"> What is past is past.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3293">&#34;You call yesterday the past?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3294">&#34;What has the actual lapse of time got to do with it? </span>
      <span id="f3295"> It is only shallow people who require years to get rid of an emotion. </span>
      <span id="f3296"> A man who is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent a pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f3297"> I don&#39;t want to be at the mercy of my emotions. </span>
      <span id="f3298"> I want to use them, to enjoy them, and to dominate them.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3299">&#34;Dorian, this is horrible! </span>
      <span id="f3300"> Something has changed you completely. </span>
      <span id="f3301"> You look exactly the same wonderful boy who, day after day, used to come down to my studio to sit for his picture. </span>
      <span id="f3302"> But you were simple, natural, and affectionate then. </span>
      <span id="f3303"> You were the most unspoiled creature in the whole world. </span>
      <span id="f3304"> Now, I don&#39;t know what has come over you. </span>
      <span id="f3305"> You talk as if you had no heart, no pity in you. </span>
      <span id="f3306"> It is all Harry&#39;s influence. </span>
      <span id="f3307"> I see that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3308">The lad flushed up and, going to the window, looked out for a few moments on the green, flickering, sun-lashed garden. </span>
      <span id="f3309"> &#34;I owe a great deal to Harry, Basil,&#34; he said at last, &#34;more than I owe to you. </span>
      <span id="f3310"> You only taught me to be vain.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3311">&#34;Well, I am punished for that, Dorian--or shall be some day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3312">&#34;I don&#39;t know what you mean, Basil,&#34; he exclaimed, turning round. </span>
      <span id="f3313"> &#34;I don&#39;t know what you want. </span>
      <span id="f3314"> What do you want?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3315">&#34;I want the Dorian Gray I used to paint,&#34; said the artist sadly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3316">&#34;Basil,&#34; said the lad, going over to him and putting his hand on his shoulder, &#34;you have come too late. </span>
      <span id="f3317"> Yesterday, when I heard that Sibyl Vane had killed herself--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3318">&#34;Killed herself! </span>
      <span id="f3319"> Good heavens! </span>
      <span id="f3320">is there no doubt about that?&#34; cried Hallward, looking up at him with an expression of horror.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3321">&#34;My dear Basil! </span>
      <span id="f3322"> Surely you don&#39;t think it was a vulgar accident? </span>
      <span id="f3323"> Of course she killed herself.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3324">The elder man buried his face in his hands. </span>
      <span id="f3325"> &#34;How fearful,&#34; he muttered, and a shudder ran through him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3326">&#34;No,&#34; said Dorian Gray, &#34;there is nothing fearful about it. </span>
      <span id="f3327"> It is one of the great romantic tragedies of the age. </span>
      <span id="f3328"> As a rule, people who act lead the most commonplace lives. </span>
      <span id="f3329"> They are good husbands, or faithful wives, or something tedious. </span>
      <span id="f3330"> You know what I mean--middle-class virtue and all that kind of thing. </span>
      <span id="f3331"> How different Sibyl was! </span>
      <span id="f3332"> She lived her finest tragedy. </span>
      <span id="f3333"> She was always a heroine. </span>
      <span id="f3334"> The last night she played--the night you saw her--she acted badly because she had known the reality of love. </span>
      <span id="f3335"> When she knew its unreality, she died, as Juliet might have died. </span>
      <span id="f3336"> She passed again into the sphere of art. </span>
      <span id="f3337"> There is something of the martyr about her. </span>
      <span id="f3338"> Her death has all the pathetic uselessness of martyrdom, all its wasted beauty. </span>
      <span id="f3339"> But, as I was saying, you must not think I have not suffered. </span>
      <span id="f3340"> If you had come in yesterday at a particular moment--about half-past five, perhaps, or a quarter to six--you would have found me in tears. </span>
      <span id="f3341"> Even Harry, who was here, who brought me the news, in fact, had no idea what I was going through. </span>
      <span id="f3342"> I suffered immensely. </span>
      <span id="f3343"> Then it passed away. </span>
      <span id="f3344"> I cannot repeat an emotion. </span>
      <span id="f3345">No one can, except sentimentalists. </span>
      <span id="f3346"> And you are awfully unjust, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f3347">You come down here to console me. </span>
      <span id="f3348"> That is charming of you. </span>
      <span id="f3349"> You find me consoled, and you are furious. </span>
      <span id="f3350"> How like a sympathetic person! </span>
      <span id="f3351"> You remind me of a story Harry told me about a certain philanthropist who spent twenty years of his life in trying to get some grievance redressed, or some unjust law altered--I forget exactly what it was. </span>
      <span id="f3352">Finally he succeeded, and nothing could exceed his disappointment. </span>
      <span id="f3353"> He had absolutely nothing to do, almost died of _ennui_, and became a confirmed misanthrope. </span>
      <span id="f3354"> And besides, my dear old Basil, if you really want to console me, teach me rather to forget what has happened, or to see it from a proper artistic point of view. </span>
      <span id="f3355"> Was it not Gautier who used to write about _la consolation des arts_? </span>
      <span id="f3356"> I remember picking up a little vellum-covered book in your studio one day and chancing on that delightful phrase. </span>
      <span id="f3357"> Well, I am not like that young man you told me of when we were down at Marlow together, the young man who used to say that yellow satin could console one for all the miseries of life. </span>
      <span id="f3358"> I love beautiful things that one can touch and handle. </span>
      <span id="f3359"> Old brocades, green bronzes, lacquer-work, carved ivories, exquisite surroundings, luxury, pomp--there is much to be got from all these. </span>
      <span id="f3360"> But the artistic temperament that they create, or at any rate reveal, is still more to me. </span>
      <span id="f3361"> To become the spectator of one&#39;s own life, as Harry says, is to escape the suffering of life. </span>
      <span id="f3362"> I know you are surprised at my talking to you like this. </span>
      <span id="f3363"> You have not realized how I have developed. </span>
      <span id="f3364"> I was a schoolboy when you knew me. </span>
      <span id="f3365"> I am a man now. </span>
      <span id="f3366"> I have new passions, new thoughts, new ideas. </span>
      <span id="f3367"> I am different, but you must not like me less. </span>
      <span id="f3368"> I am changed, but you must always be my friend. </span>
      <span id="f3369"> Of course, I am very fond of Harry. </span>
      <span id="f3370"> But I know that you are better than he is. </span>
      <span id="f3371"> You are not stronger--you are too much afraid of life--but you are better. </span>
      <span id="f3372"> And how happy we used to be together! </span>
      <span id="f3373"> Don&#39;t leave me, Basil, and don&#39;t quarrel with me. </span>
      <span id="f3374"> I am what I am. </span>
      <span id="f3375"> There is nothing more to be said.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3376">The painter felt strangely moved. </span>
      <span id="f3377"> The lad was infinitely dear to him, and his personality had been the great turning point in his art. </span>
      <span id="f3378"> He could not bear the idea of reproaching him any more. </span>
      <span id="f3379"> After all, his indifference was probably merely a mood that would pass away. </span>
      <span id="f3380"> There was so much in him that was good, so much in him that was noble.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3381">&#34;Well, Dorian,&#34; he said at length, with a sad smile, &#34;I won&#39;t speak to you again about this horrible thing, after to-day. </span>
      <span id="f3382"> I only trust your name won&#39;t be mentioned in connection with it. </span>
      <span id="f3383"> The inquest is to take place this afternoon. </span>
      <span id="f3384"> Have they summoned you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3385">Dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face at the mention of the word &#34;inquest.&#34;  There was something so crude and vulgar about everything of the kind. </span>
      <span id="f3386"> &#34;They don&#39;t know my name,&#34; he answered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3387">&#34;But surely she did?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3388">&#34;Only my Christian name, and that I am quite sure she never mentioned to any one. </span>
      <span id="f3389"> She told me once that they were all rather curious to learn who I was, and that she invariably told them my name was Prince Charming. </span>
      <span id="f3390"> It was pretty of her. </span>
      <span id="f3391"> You must do me a drawing of Sibyl, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f3392"> I should like to have something more of her than the memory of a few kisses and some broken pathetic words.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3393">&#34;I will try and do something, Dorian, if it would please you. </span>
      <span id="f3394"> But you must come and sit to me yourself again. </span>
      <span id="f3395"> I can&#39;t get on without you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3396">&#34;I can never sit to you again, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f3397"> It is impossible!&#34; he exclaimed, starting back.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3398">The painter stared at him. </span>
      <span id="f3399"> &#34;My dear boy, what nonsense!&#34; he cried. </span>
      <span id="f3400">&#34;Do you mean to say you don&#39;t like what I did of you? </span>
      <span id="f3401"> Where is it? </span>
      <span id="f3402">Why have you pulled the screen in front of it? </span>
      <span id="f3403"> Let me look at it. </span>
      <span id="f3404"> It is the best thing I have ever done. </span>
      <span id="f3405"> Do take the screen away, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f3406">It is simply disgraceful of your servant hiding my work like that. </span>
      <span id="f3407"> I felt the room looked different as I came in.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3408">&#34;My servant has nothing to do with it, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f3409"> You don&#39;t imagine I let him arrange my room for me? </span>
      <span id="f3410"> He settles my flowers for me sometimes--that is all. </span>
      <span id="f3411"> No; I did it myself. </span>
      <span id="f3412"> The light was too strong on the portrait.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3413">&#34;Too strong! </span>
      <span id="f3414"> Surely not, my dear fellow? </span>
      <span id="f3415"> It is an admirable place for it. </span>
      <span id="f3416"> Let me see it.&#34;  And Hallward walked towards the corner of the room.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3417">A cry of terror broke from Dorian Gray&#39;s lips, and he rushed between the painter and the screen. </span>
      <span id="f3418"> &#34;Basil,&#34; he said, looking very pale, &#34;you must not look at it. </span>
      <span id="f3419"> I don&#39;t wish you to.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3420">&#34;Not look at my own work! </span>
      <span id="f3421"> You are not serious. </span>
      <span id="f3422"> Why shouldn&#39;t I look at it?&#34; exclaimed Hallward, laughing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3423">&#34;If you try to look at it, Basil, on my word of honour I will never speak to you again as long as I live. </span>
      <span id="f3424"> I am quite serious. </span>
      <span id="f3425"> I don&#39;t offer any explanation, and you are not to ask for any. </span>
      <span id="f3426"> But, remember, if you touch this screen, everything is over between us.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3427">Hallward was thunderstruck. </span>
      <span id="f3428"> He looked at Dorian Gray in absolute amazement. </span>
      <span id="f3429"> He had never seen him like this before. </span>
      <span id="f3430"> The lad was actually pallid with rage. </span>
      <span id="f3431"> His hands were clenched, and the pupils of his eyes were like disks of blue fire. </span>
      <span id="f3432"> He was trembling all over.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3433">&#34;Dorian!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3434">&#34;Don&#39;t speak!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3435">&#34;But what is the matter? </span>
      <span id="f3436"> Of course I won&#39;t look at it if you don&#39;t want me to,&#34; he said, rather coldly, turning on his heel and going over towards the window. </span>
      <span id="f3437"> &#34;But, really, it seems rather absurd that I shouldn&#39;t see my own work, especially as I am going to exhibit it in Paris in the autumn. </span>
      <span id="f3438"> I shall probably have to give it another coat of varnish before that, so I must see it some day, and why not to-day?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3439">&#34;To exhibit it! </span>
      <span id="f3440"> You want to exhibit it?&#34; exclaimed Dorian Gray, a strange sense of terror creeping over him. </span>
      <span id="f3441"> Was the world going to be shown his secret? </span>
      <span id="f3442"> Were people to gape at the mystery of his life? </span>
      <span id="f3443">That was impossible. </span>
      <span id="f3444"> Something--he did not know what--had to be done at once.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3445">&#34;Yes; I don&#39;t suppose you will object to that. </span>
      <span id="f3446"> Georges Petit is going to collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition in the Rue de Seze, which will open the first week in October. </span>
      <span id="f3447"> The portrait will only be away a month. </span>
      <span id="f3448"> I should think you could easily spare it for that time. </span>
      <span id="f3449"> In fact, you are sure to be out of town. </span>
      <span id="f3450"> And if you keep it always behind a screen, you can&#39;t care much about it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3451">Dorian Gray passed his hand over his forehead. </span>
      <span id="f3452"> There were beads of perspiration there. </span>
      <span id="f3453"> He felt that he was on the brink of a horrible danger. </span>
      <span id="f3454"> &#34;You told me a month ago that you would never exhibit it,&#34; he cried. </span>
      <span id="f3455"> &#34;Why have you changed your mind? </span>
      <span id="f3456"> You people who go in for being consistent have just as many moods as others have. </span>
      <span id="f3457"> The only difference is that your moods are rather meaningless. </span>
      <span id="f3458"> You can&#39;t have forgotten that you assured me most solemnly that nothing in the world would induce you to send it to any exhibition. </span>
      <span id="f3459"> You told Harry exactly the same thing.&#34; He stopped suddenly, and a gleam of light came into his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f3460"> He remembered that Lord Henry had said to him once, half seriously and half in jest, &#34;If you want to have a strange quarter of an hour, get Basil to tell you why he won&#39;t exhibit your picture. </span>
      <span id="f3461"> He told me why he wouldn&#39;t, and it was a revelation to me.&#34;  Yes, perhaps Basil, too, had his secret. </span>
      <span id="f3462"> He would ask him and try.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3463">&#34;Basil,&#34; he said, coming over quite close and looking him straight in the face, &#34;we have each of us a secret. </span>
      <span id="f3464"> Let me know yours, and I shall tell you mine. </span>
      <span id="f3465"> What was your reason for refusing to exhibit my picture?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3466">The painter shuddered in spite of himself. </span>
      <span id="f3467"> &#34;Dorian, if I told you, you might like me less than you do, and you would certainly laugh at me. </span>
      <span id="f3468"> I could not bear your doing either of those two things. </span>
      <span id="f3469"> If you wish me never to look at your picture again, I am content. </span>
      <span id="f3470"> I have always you to look at. </span>
      <span id="f3471"> If you wish the best work I have ever done to be hidden from the world, I am satisfied. </span>
      <span id="f3472"> Your friendship is dearer to me than any fame or reputation.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3473">&#34;No, Basil, you must tell me,&#34; insisted Dorian Gray. </span>
      <span id="f3474"> &#34;I think I have a right to know.&#34;  His feeling of terror had passed away, and curiosity had taken its place. </span>
      <span id="f3475"> He was determined to find out Basil Hallward&#39;s mystery.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3476">&#34;Let us sit down, Dorian,&#34; said the painter, looking troubled. </span>
      <span id="f3477"> &#34;Let us sit down. </span>
      <span id="f3478"> And just answer me one question. </span>
      <span id="f3479"> Have you noticed in the picture something curious?--something that probably at first did not strike you, but that revealed itself to you suddenly?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3480">&#34;Basil!&#34; cried the lad, clutching the arms of his chair with trembling hands and gazing at him with wild startled eyes.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3481">&#34;I see you did. </span>
      <span id="f3482"> Don&#39;t speak. </span>
      <span id="f3483"> Wait till you hear what I have to say. </span>
      <span id="f3484">Dorian, from the moment I met you, your personality had the most extraordinary influence over me. </span>
      <span id="f3485"> I was dominated, soul, brain, and power, by you. </span>
      <span id="f3486"> You became to me the visible incarnation of that unseen ideal whose memory haunts us artists like an exquisite dream. </span>
      <span id="f3487"> I worshipped you. </span>
      <span id="f3488"> I grew jealous of every one to whom you spoke. </span>
      <span id="f3489"> I wanted to have you all to myself. </span>
      <span id="f3490"> I was only happy when I was with you. </span>
      <span id="f3491"> When you were away from me, you were still present in my art.... </span>
      <span id="f3492">Of course, I never let you know anything about this. </span>
      <span id="f3493"> It would have been impossible. </span>
      <span id="f3494"> You would not have understood it. </span>
      <span id="f3495"> I hardly understood it myself. </span>
      <span id="f3496"> I only knew that I had seen perfection face to face, and that the world had become wonderful to my eyes--too wonderful, perhaps, for in such mad worships there is peril, the peril of losing them, no less than the peril of keeping them.... </span>
      <span id="f3497"> Weeks and weeks went on, and I grew more and more absorbed in you. </span>
      <span id="f3498"> Then came a new development. </span>
      <span id="f3499"> I had drawn you as Paris in dainty armour, and as Adonis with huntsman&#39;s cloak and polished boar-spear. </span>
      <span id="f3500">Crowned with heavy lotus-blossoms you had sat on the prow of Adrian&#39;s barge, gazing across the green turbid Nile. </span>
      <span id="f3501"> You had leaned over the still pool of some Greek woodland and seen in the water&#39;s silent silver the marvel of your own face. </span>
      <span id="f3502"> And it had all been what art should be--unconscious, ideal, and remote. </span>
      <span id="f3503"> One day, a fatal day I sometimes think, I determined to paint a wonderful portrait of you as you actually are, not in the costume of dead ages, but in your own dress and in your own time. </span>
      <span id="f3504"> Whether it was the realism of the method, or the mere wonder of your own personality, thus directly presented to me without mist or veil, I cannot tell. </span>
      <span id="f3505"> But I know that as I worked at it, every flake and film of colour seemed to me to reveal my secret. </span>
      <span id="f3506"> I grew afraid that others would know of my idolatry. </span>
      <span id="f3507"> I felt, Dorian, that I had told too much, that I had put too much of myself into it. </span>
      <span id="f3508"> Then it was that I resolved never to allow the picture to be exhibited. </span>
      <span id="f3509"> You were a little annoyed; but then you did not realize all that it meant to me. </span>
      <span id="f3510">Harry, to whom I talked about it, laughed at me. </span>
      <span id="f3511"> But I did not mind that. </span>
      <span id="f3512"> When the picture was finished, and I sat alone with it, I felt that I was right.... </span>
      <span id="f3513">Well, after a few days the thing left my studio, and as soon as I had got rid of the intolerable fascination of its presence, it seemed to me that I had been foolish in imagining that I had seen anything in it, more than that you were extremely good-looking and that I could paint. </span>
      <span id="f3514"> Even now I cannot help feeling that it is a mistake to think that the passion one feels in creation is ever really shown in the work one creates. </span>
      <span id="f3515"> Art is always more abstract than we fancy. </span>
      <span id="f3516"> Form and colour tell us of form and colour--that is all. </span>
      <span id="f3517"> It often seems to me that art conceals the artist far more completely than it ever reveals him. </span>
      <span id="f3518"> And so when I got this offer from Paris, I determined to make your portrait the principal thing in my exhibition. </span>
      <span id="f3519">It never occurred to me that you would refuse. </span>
      <span id="f3520"> I see now that you were right. </span>
      <span id="f3521"> The picture cannot be shown. </span>
      <span id="f3522"> You must not be angry with me, Dorian, for what I have told you. </span>
      <span id="f3523"> As I said to Harry, once, you are made to be worshipped.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3524">Dorian Gray drew a long breath. </span>
      <span id="f3525"> The colour came back to his cheeks, and a smile played about his lips. </span>
      <span id="f3526"> The peril was over. </span>
      <span id="f3527"> He was safe for the time. </span>
      <span id="f3528"> Yet he could not help feeling infinite pity for the painter who had just made this strange confession to him, and wondered if he himself would ever be so dominated by the personality of a friend. </span>
      <span id="f3529"> Lord Henry had the charm of being very dangerous. </span>
      <span id="f3530"> But that was all. </span>
      <span id="f3531"> He was too clever and too cynical to be really fond of. </span>
      <span id="f3532">Would there ever be some one who would fill him with a strange idolatry? </span>
      <span id="f3533"> Was that one of the things that life had in store?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3534">&#34;It is extraordinary to me, Dorian,&#34; said Hallward, &#34;that you should have seen this in the portrait. </span>
      <span id="f3535"> Did you really see it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3536">&#34;I saw something in it,&#34; he answered, &#34;something that seemed to me very curious.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3537">&#34;Well, you don&#39;t mind my looking at the thing now?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3538">Dorian shook his head. </span>
      <span id="f3539"> &#34;You must not ask me that, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f3540"> I could not possibly let you stand in front of that picture.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3541">&#34;You will some day, surely?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3542">&#34;Never.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3543">&#34;Well, perhaps you are right. </span>
      <span id="f3544"> And now good-bye, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f3545"> You have been the one person in my life who has really influenced my art. </span>
      <span id="f3546"> Whatever I have done that is good, I owe to you. </span>
      <span id="f3547"> Ah! </span>
      <span id="f3548">you don&#39;t know what it cost me to tell you all that I have told you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3549">&#34;My dear Basil,&#34; said Dorian, &#34;what have you told me? </span>
      <span id="f3550"> Simply that you felt that you admired me too much. </span>
      <span id="f3551"> That is not even a compliment.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3552">&#34;It was not intended as a compliment. </span>
      <span id="f3553"> It was a confession. </span>
      <span id="f3554"> Now that I have made it, something seems to have gone out of me. </span>
      <span id="f3555"> Perhaps one should never put one&#39;s worship into words.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3556">&#34;It was a very disappointing confession.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3557">&#34;Why, what did you expect, Dorian? </span>
      <span id="f3558"> You didn&#39;t see anything else in the picture, did you? </span>
      <span id="f3559"> There was nothing else to see?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3560">&#34;No; there was nothing else to see. </span>
      <span id="f3561"> Why do you ask? </span>
      <span id="f3562"> But you mustn&#39;t talk about worship. </span>
      <span id="f3563"> It is foolish. </span>
      <span id="f3564"> You and I are friends, Basil, and we must always remain so.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3565">&#34;You have got Harry,&#34; said the painter sadly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3566">&#34;Oh, Harry!&#34; cried the lad, with a ripple of laughter. </span>
      <span id="f3567"> &#34;Harry spends his days in saying what is incredible and his evenings in doing what is improbable. </span>
      <span id="f3568"> Just the sort of life I would like to lead. </span>
      <span id="f3569"> But still I don&#39;t think I would go to Harry if I were in trouble. </span>
      <span id="f3570"> I would sooner go to you, Basil.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3571">&#34;You will sit to me again?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3572">&#34;Impossible!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3573">&#34;You spoil my life as an artist by refusing, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f3574"> No man comes across two ideal things. </span>
      <span id="f3575"> Few come across one.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3576">&#34;I can&#39;t explain it to you, Basil, but I must never sit to you again. </span>
      <span id="f3577">There is something fatal about a portrait. </span>
      <span id="f3578"> It has a life of its own. </span>
      <span id="f3579">I will come and have tea with you. </span>
      <span id="f3580"> That will be just as pleasant.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3581">&#34;Pleasanter for you, I am afraid,&#34; murmured Hallward regretfully. </span>
      <span id="f3582"> &#34;And now good-bye. </span>
      <span id="f3583">I am sorry you won&#39;t let me look at the picture once again. </span>
      <span id="f3584"> But that can&#39;t be helped. </span>
      <span id="f3585"> I quite understand what you feel about it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3586">As he left the room, Dorian Gray smiled to himself. </span>
      <span id="f3587"> Poor Basil! </span>
      <span id="f3588"> How little he knew of the true reason! </span>
      <span id="f3589"> And how strange it was that, instead of having been forced to reveal his own secret, he had succeeded, almost by chance, in wresting a secret from his friend! </span>
      <span id="f3590"> How much that strange confession explained to him! </span>
      <span id="f3591"> The painter&#39;s absurd fits of jealousy, his wild devotion, his extravagant panegyrics, his curious reticences--he understood them all now, and he felt sorry. </span>
      <span id="f3592">There seemed to him to be something tragic in a friendship so coloured by romance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3593">He sighed and touched the bell. </span>
      <span id="f3594"> The portrait must be hidden away at all costs. </span>
      <span id="f3595"> He could not run such a risk of discovery again. </span>
      <span id="f3596"> It had been mad of him to have allowed the thing to remain, even for an hour, in a room to which any of his friends had access.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>