<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER 10</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f3597">CHAPTER 10</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f3598">When his servant entered, he looked at him steadfastly and wondered if he had thought of peering behind the screen. </span>
      <span id="f3599"> The man was quite impassive and waited for his orders. </span>
      <span id="f3600"> Dorian lit a cigarette and walked over to the glass and glanced into it. </span>
      <span id="f3601"> He could see the reflection of Victor&#39;s face perfectly. </span>
      <span id="f3602"> It was like a placid mask of servility. </span>
      <span id="f3603">There was nothing to be afraid of, there. </span>
      <span id="f3604"> Yet he thought it best to be on his guard.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3605">Speaking very slowly, he told him to tell the house-keeper that he wanted to see her, and then to go to the frame-maker and ask him to send two of his men round at once. </span>
      <span id="f3606"> It seemed to him that as the man left the room his eyes wandered in the direction of the screen. </span>
      <span id="f3607"> Or was that merely his own fancy?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3608">After a few moments, in her black silk dress, with old-fashioned thread mittens on her wrinkled hands, Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f3609">Leaf bustled into the library. </span>
      <span id="f3610"> He asked her for the key of the schoolroom.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3611">&#34;The old schoolroom, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3612">Dorian?&#34; she exclaimed. </span>
      <span id="f3613"> &#34;Why, it is full of dust. </span>
      <span id="f3614"> I must get it arranged and put straight before you go into it. </span>
      <span id="f3615">It is not fit for you to see, sir. </span>
      <span id="f3616"> It is not, indeed.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3617">&#34;I don&#39;t want it put straight, Leaf. </span>
      <span id="f3618"> I only want the key.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3619">&#34;Well, sir, you&#39;ll be covered with cobwebs if you go into it. </span>
      <span id="f3620"> Why, it hasn&#39;t been opened for nearly five years--not since his lordship died.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3621">He winced at the mention of his grandfather. </span>
      <span id="f3622"> He had hateful memories of him. </span>
      <span id="f3623"> &#34;That does not matter,&#34; he answered. </span>
      <span id="f3624"> &#34;I simply want to see the place--that is all. </span>
      <span id="f3625"> Give me the key.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3626">&#34;And here is the key, sir,&#34; said the old lady, going over the contents of her bunch with tremulously uncertain hands. </span>
      <span id="f3627"> &#34;Here is the key. </span>
      <span id="f3628"> I&#39;ll have it off the bunch in a moment. </span>
      <span id="f3629"> But you don&#39;t think of living up there, sir, and you so comfortable here?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3630">&#34;No, no,&#34; he cried petulantly. </span>
      <span id="f3631"> &#34;Thank you, Leaf. </span>
      <span id="f3632"> That will do.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3633">She lingered for a few moments, and was garrulous over some detail of the household. </span>
      <span id="f3634"> He sighed and told her to manage things as she thought best. </span>
      <span id="f3635"> She left the room, wreathed in smiles.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3636">As the door closed, Dorian put the key in his pocket and looked round the room. </span>
      <span id="f3637"> His eye fell on a large, purple satin coverlet heavily embroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century Venetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent near Bologna. </span>
      <span id="f3638">Yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in. </span>
      <span id="f3639"> It had perhaps served often as a pall for the dead. </span>
      <span id="f3640"> Now it was to hide something that had a corruption of its own, worse than the corruption of death itself--something that would breed horrors and yet would never die. </span>
      <span id="f3641">What the worm was to the corpse, his sins would be to the painted image on the canvas. </span>
      <span id="f3642"> They would mar its beauty and eat away its grace. </span>
      <span id="f3643"> They would defile it and make it shameful. </span>
      <span id="f3644"> And yet the thing would still live on. </span>
      <span id="f3645"> It would be always alive.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3646">He shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had not told Basil the true reason why he had wished to hide the picture away. </span>
      <span id="f3647"> Basil would have helped him to resist Lord Henry&#39;s influence, and the still more poisonous influences that came from his own temperament. </span>
      <span id="f3648"> The love that he bore him--for it was really love--had nothing in it that was not noble and intellectual. </span>
      <span id="f3649"> It was not that mere physical admiration of beauty that is born of the senses and that dies when the senses tire. </span>
      <span id="f3650"> It was such love as Michelangelo had known, and Montaigne, and Winckelmann, and Shakespeare himself. </span>
      <span id="f3651"> Yes, Basil could have saved him. </span>
      <span id="f3652">But it was too late now. </span>
      <span id="f3653"> The past could always be annihilated. </span>
      <span id="f3654">Regret, denial, or forgetfulness could do that. </span>
      <span id="f3655"> But the future was inevitable. </span>
      <span id="f3656"> There were passions in him that would find their terrible outlet, dreams that would make the shadow of their evil real.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3657">He took up from the couch the great purple-and-gold texture that covered it, and, holding it in his hands, passed behind the screen. </span>
      <span id="f3658">Was the face on the canvas viler than before? </span>
      <span id="f3659"> It seemed to him that it was unchanged, and yet his loathing of it was intensified. </span>
      <span id="f3660"> Gold hair, blue eyes, and rose-red lips--they all were there. </span>
      <span id="f3661"> It was simply the expression that had altered. </span>
      <span id="f3662"> That was horrible in its cruelty. </span>
      <span id="f3663">Compared to what he saw in it of censure or rebuke, how shallow Basil&#39;s reproaches about Sibyl Vane had been!--how shallow, and of what little account! </span>
      <span id="f3664"> His own soul was looking out at him from the canvas and calling him to judgement. </span>
      <span id="f3665"> A look of pain came across him, and he flung the rich pall over the picture. </span>
      <span id="f3666"> As he did so, a knock came to the door. </span>
      <span id="f3667"> He passed out as his servant entered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3668">&#34;The persons are here, Monsieur.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3669">He felt that the man must be got rid of at once. </span>
      <span id="f3670"> He must not be allowed to know where the picture was being taken to. </span>
      <span id="f3671"> There was something sly about him, and he had thoughtful, treacherous eyes. </span>
      <span id="f3672">Sitting down at the writing-table he scribbled a note to Lord Henry, asking him to send him round something to read and reminding him that they were to meet at eight-fifteen that evening.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3673">&#34;Wait for an answer,&#34; he said, handing it to him, &#34;and show the men in here.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3674">In two or three minutes there was another knock, and Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3675">Hubbard himself, the celebrated frame-maker of South Audley Street, came in with a somewhat rough-looking young assistant. </span>
      <span id="f3676"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3677">Hubbard was a florid, red-whiskered little man, whose admiration for art was considerably tempered by the inveterate impecuniosity of most of the artists who dealt with him. </span>
      <span id="f3678"> As a rule, he never left his shop. </span>
      <span id="f3679"> He waited for people to come to him. </span>
      <span id="f3680"> But he always made an exception in favour of Dorian Gray. </span>
      <span id="f3681"> There was something about Dorian that charmed everybody. </span>
      <span id="f3682"> It was a pleasure even to see him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3683">&#34;What can I do for you, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3684">Gray?&#34; he said, rubbing his fat freckled hands. </span>
      <span id="f3685"> &#34;I thought I would do myself the honour of coming round in person. </span>
      <span id="f3686"> I have just got a beauty of a frame, sir. </span>
      <span id="f3687"> Picked it up at a sale. </span>
      <span id="f3688"> Old Florentine. </span>
      <span id="f3689"> Came from Fonthill, I believe. </span>
      <span id="f3690"> Admirably suited for a religious subject, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3691">Gray.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3692">&#34;I am so sorry you have given yourself the trouble of coming round, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3693">Hubbard. </span>
      <span id="f3694"> I shall certainly drop in and look at the frame--though I don&#39;t go in much at present for religious art--but to-day I only want a picture carried to the top of the house for me. </span>
      <span id="f3695"> It is rather heavy, so I thought I would ask you to lend me a couple of your men.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3696">&#34;No trouble at all, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3697">Gray. </span>
      <span id="f3698"> I am delighted to be of any service to you. </span>
      <span id="f3699"> Which is the work of art, sir?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3700">&#34;This,&#34; replied Dorian, moving the screen back. </span>
      <span id="f3701"> &#34;Can you move it, covering and all, just as it is? </span>
      <span id="f3702"> I don&#39;t want it to get scratched going upstairs.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3703">&#34;There will be no difficulty, sir,&#34; said the genial frame-maker, beginning, with the aid of his assistant, to unhook the picture from the long brass chains by which it was suspended. </span>
      <span id="f3704"> &#34;And, now, where shall we carry it to, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3705">Gray?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3706">&#34;I will show you the way, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3707">Hubbard, if you will kindly follow me. </span>
      <span id="f3708">Or perhaps you had better go in front. </span>
      <span id="f3709"> I am afraid it is right at the top of the house. </span>
      <span id="f3710"> We will go up by the front staircase, as it is wider.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3711">He held the door open for them, and they passed out into the hall and began the ascent. </span>
      <span id="f3712"> The elaborate character of the frame had made the picture extremely bulky, and now and then, in spite of the obsequious protests of Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3713">Hubbard, who had the true tradesman&#39;s spirited dislike of seeing a gentleman doing anything useful, Dorian put his hand to it so as to help them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3714">&#34;Something of a load to carry, sir,&#34; gasped the little man when they reached the top landing. </span>
      <span id="f3715"> And he wiped his shiny forehead.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3716">&#34;I am afraid it is rather heavy,&#34; murmured Dorian as he unlocked the door that opened into the room that was to keep for him the curious secret of his life and hide his soul from the eyes of men.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3717">He had not entered the place for more than four years--not, indeed, since he had used it first as a play-room when he was a child, and then as a study when he grew somewhat older. </span>
      <span id="f3718"> It was a large, well-proportioned room, which had been specially built by the last Lord Kelso for the use of the little grandson whom, for his strange likeness to his mother, and also for other reasons, he had always hated and desired to keep at a distance. </span>
      <span id="f3719"> It appeared to Dorian to have but little changed. </span>
      <span id="f3720"> There was the huge Italian _cassone_, with its fantastically painted panels and its tarnished gilt mouldings, in which he had so often hidden himself as a boy. </span>
      <span id="f3721"> There the satinwood book-case filled with his dog-eared schoolbooks. </span>
      <span id="f3722"> On the wall behind it was hanging the same ragged Flemish tapestry where a faded king and queen were playing chess in a garden, while a company of hawkers rode by, carrying hooded birds on their gauntleted wrists. </span>
      <span id="f3723"> How well he remembered it all! </span>
      <span id="f3724"> Every moment of his lonely childhood came back to him as he looked round. </span>
      <span id="f3725"> He recalled the stainless purity of his boyish life, and it seemed horrible to him that it was here the fatal portrait was to be hidden away. </span>
      <span id="f3726"> How little he had thought, in those dead days, of all that was in store for him!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3727">But there was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes as this. </span>
      <span id="f3728"> He had the key, and no one else could enter it. </span>
      <span id="f3729"> Beneath its purple pall, the face painted on the canvas could grow bestial, sodden, and unclean. </span>
      <span id="f3730"> What did it matter? </span>
      <span id="f3731"> No one could see it. </span>
      <span id="f3732"> He himself would not see it. </span>
      <span id="f3733"> Why should he watch the hideous corruption of his soul? </span>
      <span id="f3734"> He kept his youth--that was enough. </span>
      <span id="f3735"> And, besides, might not his nature grow finer, after all? </span>
      <span id="f3736"> There was no reason that the future should be so full of shame. </span>
      <span id="f3737"> Some love might come across his life, and purify him, and shield him from those sins that seemed to be already stirring in spirit and in flesh--those curious unpictured sins whose very mystery lent them their subtlety and their charm. </span>
      <span id="f3738"> Perhaps, some day, the cruel look would have passed away from the scarlet sensitive mouth, and he might show to the world Basil Hallward&#39;s masterpiece.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3739">No; that was impossible. </span>
      <span id="f3740"> Hour by hour, and week by week, the thing upon the canvas was growing old. </span>
      <span id="f3741"> It might escape the hideousness of sin, but the hideousness of age was in store for it. </span>
      <span id="f3742"> The cheeks would become hollow or flaccid. </span>
      <span id="f3743"> Yellow crow&#39;s feet would creep round the fading eyes and make them horrible. </span>
      <span id="f3744"> The hair would lose its brightness, the mouth would gape or droop, would be foolish or gross, as the mouths of old men are. </span>
      <span id="f3745"> There would be the wrinkled throat, the cold, blue-veined hands, the twisted body, that he remembered in the grandfather who had been so stern to him in his boyhood. </span>
      <span id="f3746"> The picture had to be concealed. </span>
      <span id="f3747"> There was no help for it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3748">&#34;Bring it in, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3749">Hubbard, please,&#34; he said, wearily, turning round. </span>
      <span id="f3750">&#34;I am sorry I kept you so long. </span>
      <span id="f3751"> I was thinking of something else.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3752">&#34;Always glad to have a rest, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3753">Gray,&#34; answered the frame-maker, who was still gasping for breath. </span>
      <span id="f3754"> &#34;Where shall we put it, sir?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3755">&#34;Oh, anywhere. </span>
      <span id="f3756"> Here:  this will do. </span>
      <span id="f3757"> I don&#39;t want to have it hung up. </span>
      <span id="f3758">Just lean it against the wall. </span>
      <span id="f3759"> Thanks.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3760">&#34;Might one look at the work of art, sir?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3761">Dorian started. </span>
      <span id="f3762"> &#34;It would not interest you, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3763">Hubbard,&#34; he said, keeping his eye on the man. </span>
      <span id="f3764"> He felt ready to leap upon him and fling him to the ground if he dared to lift the gorgeous hanging that concealed the secret of his life. </span>
      <span id="f3765"> &#34;I shan&#39;t trouble you any more now. </span>
      <span id="f3766">I am much obliged for your kindness in coming round.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3767">&#34;Not at all, not at all, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3768">Gray. </span>
      <span id="f3769"> Ever ready to do anything for you, sir.&#34; And Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3770">Hubbard tramped downstairs, followed by the assistant, who glanced back at Dorian with a look of shy wonder in his rough uncomely face. </span>
      <span id="f3771"> He had never seen any one so marvellous.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3772">When the sound of their footsteps had died away, Dorian locked the door and put the key in his pocket. </span>
      <span id="f3773"> He felt safe now. </span>
      <span id="f3774"> No one would ever look upon the horrible thing. </span>
      <span id="f3775"> No eye but his would ever see his shame.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3776">On reaching the library, he found that it was just after five o&#39;clock and that the tea had been already brought up. </span>
      <span id="f3777"> On a little table of dark perfumed wood thickly incrusted with nacre, a present from Lady Radley, his guardian&#39;s wife, a pretty professional invalid who had spent the preceding winter in Cairo, was lying a note from Lord Henry, and beside it was a book bound in yellow paper, the cover slightly torn and the edges soiled. </span>
      <span id="f3778"> A copy of the third edition of _The St. </span>
      <span id="f3779">James&#39;s Gazette_ had been placed on the tea-tray. </span>
      <span id="f3780">It was evident that Victor had returned. </span>
      <span id="f3781"> He wondered if he had met the men in the hall as they were leaving the house and had wormed out of them what they had been doing. </span>
      <span id="f3782">He would be sure to miss the picture--had no doubt missed it already, while he had been laying the tea-things. </span>
      <span id="f3783">The screen had not been set back, and a blank space was visible on the wall. </span>
      <span id="f3784"> Perhaps some night he might find him creeping upstairs and trying to force the door of the room. </span>
      <span id="f3785"> It was a horrible thing to have a spy in one&#39;s house. </span>
      <span id="f3786"> He had heard of rich men who had been blackmailed all their lives by some servant who had read a letter, or overheard a conversation, or picked up a card with an address, or found beneath a pillow a withered flower or a shred of crumpled lace.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3787">He sighed, and having poured himself out some tea, opened Lord Henry&#39;s note. </span>
      <span id="f3788"> It was simply to say that he sent him round the evening paper, and a book that might interest him, and that he would be at the club at eight-fifteen. </span>
      <span id="f3789">He opened _The St. </span>
      <span id="f3790">James&#39;s_ languidly, and looked through it. </span>
      <span id="f3791"> A red pencil-mark on the fifth page caught his eye. </span>
      <span id="f3792"> It drew attention to the following paragraph:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3793">INQUEST ON AN ACTRESS.--An inquest was held this morning at the Bell Tavern, Hoxton Road, by Mr. </span>
      <span id="f3794">Danby, the District Coroner, on the body of Sibyl Vane, a young actress recently engaged at the Royal Theatre, Holborn. </span>
      <span id="f3795"> A verdict of death by misadventure was returned. </span>
      <span id="f3796">Considerable sympathy was expressed for the mother of the deceased, who was greatly affected during the giving of her own evidence, and that of Dr. </span>
      <span id="f3797">Birrell, who had made the post-mortem examination of the deceased.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3798">He frowned, and tearing the paper in two, went across the room and flung the pieces away. </span>
      <span id="f3799"> How ugly it all was! </span>
      <span id="f3800"> And how horribly real ugliness made things! </span>
      <span id="f3801"> He felt a little annoyed with Lord Henry for having sent him the report. </span>
      <span id="f3802"> And it was certainly stupid of him to have marked it with red pencil. </span>
      <span id="f3803"> Victor might have read it. </span>
      <span id="f3804"> The man knew more than enough English for that.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3805">Perhaps he had read it and had begun to suspect something. </span>
      <span id="f3806"> And, yet, what did it matter? </span>
      <span id="f3807"> What had Dorian Gray to do with Sibyl Vane&#39;s death? </span>
      <span id="f3808"> There was nothing to fear. </span>
      <span id="f3809"> Dorian Gray had not killed her.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3810">His eye fell on the yellow book that Lord Henry had sent him. </span>
      <span id="f3811"> What was it, he wondered. </span>
      <span id="f3812"> He went towards the little, pearl-coloured octagonal stand that had always looked to him like the work of some strange Egyptian bees that wrought in silver, and taking up the volume, flung himself into an arm-chair and began to turn over the leaves. </span>
      <span id="f3813"> After a few minutes he became absorbed. </span>
      <span id="f3814"> It was the strangest book that he had ever read. </span>
      <span id="f3815"> It seemed to him that in exquisite raiment, and to the delicate sound of flutes, the sins of the world were passing in dumb show before him. </span>
      <span id="f3816"> Things that he had dimly dreamed of were suddenly made real to him. </span>
      <span id="f3817"> Things of which he had never dreamed were gradually revealed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3818">It was a novel without a plot and with only one character, being, indeed, simply a psychological study of a certain young Parisian who spent his life trying to realize in the nineteenth century all the passions and modes of thought that belonged to every century except his own, and to sum up, as it were, in himself the various moods through which the world-spirit had ever passed, loving for their mere artificiality those renunciations that men have unwisely called virtue, as much as those natural rebellions that wise men still call sin. </span>
      <span id="f3819"> The style in which it was written was that curious jewelled style, vivid and obscure at once, full of _argot_ and of archaisms, of technical expressions and of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes the work of some of the finest artists of the French school of _Symbolistes_. </span>
      <span id="f3820">There were in it metaphors as monstrous as orchids and as subtle in colour. </span>
      <span id="f3821"> The life of the senses was described in the terms of mystical philosophy. </span>
      <span id="f3822"> One hardly knew at times whether one was reading the spiritual ecstasies of some mediaeval saint or the morbid confessions of a modern sinner. </span>
      <span id="f3823"> It was a poisonous book. </span>
      <span id="f3824"> The heavy odour of incense seemed to cling about its pages and to trouble the brain. </span>
      <span id="f3825"> The mere cadence of the sentences, the subtle monotony of their music, so full as it was of complex refrains and movements elaborately repeated, produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed from chapter to chapter, a form of reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him unconscious of the falling day and creeping shadows.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3826">Cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky gleamed through the windows. </span>
      <span id="f3827"> He read on by its wan light till he could read no more. </span>
      <span id="f3828"> Then, after his valet had reminded him several times of the lateness of the hour, he got up, and going into the next room, placed the book on the little Florentine table that always stood at his bedside and began to dress for dinner.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3829">It was almost nine o&#39;clock before he reached the club, where he found Lord Henry sitting alone, in the morning-room, looking very much bored.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3830">&#34;I am so sorry, Harry,&#34; he cried, &#34;but really it is entirely your fault. </span>
      <span id="f3831"> That book you sent me so fascinated me that I forgot how the time was going.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3832">&#34;Yes, I thought you would like it,&#34; replied his host, rising from his chair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3833">&#34;I didn&#39;t say I liked it, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f3834"> I said it fascinated me. </span>
      <span id="f3835"> There is a great difference.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f3836">&#34;Ah, you have discovered that?&#34; murmured Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f3837"> And they passed into the dining-room.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>