<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f4065">CHAPTER 12</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f4066">It was on the ninth of November, the eve of his own thirty-eighth birthday, as he often remembered afterwards.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4067">He was walking home about eleven o&#39;clock from Lord Henry&#39;s, where he had been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the night was cold and foggy. </span>
      <span id="f4068"> At the corner of Grosvenor Square and South Audley Street, a man passed him in the mist, walking very fast and with the collar of his grey ulster turned up. </span>
      <span id="f4069"> He had a bag in his hand. </span>
      <span id="f4070"> Dorian recognized him. </span>
      <span id="f4071"> It was Basil Hallward. </span>
      <span id="f4072"> A strange sense of fear, for which he could not account, came over him. </span>
      <span id="f4073"> He made no sign of recognition and went on quickly in the direction of his own house.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4074">But Hallward had seen him. </span>
      <span id="f4075"> Dorian heard him first stopping on the pavement and then hurrying after him. </span>
      <span id="f4076"> In a few moments, his hand was on his arm.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4077">&#34;Dorian! </span>
      <span id="f4078"> What an extraordinary piece of luck! </span>
      <span id="f4079"> I have been waiting for you in your library ever since nine o&#39;clock. </span>
      <span id="f4080">Finally I took pity on your tired servant and told him to go to bed, as he let me out. </span>
      <span id="f4081"> I am off to Paris by the midnight train, and I particularly wanted to see you before I left. </span>
      <span id="f4082"> I thought it was you, or rather your fur coat, as you passed me. </span>
      <span id="f4083"> But I wasn&#39;t quite sure. </span>
      <span id="f4084"> Didn&#39;t you recognize me?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4085">&#34;In this fog, my dear Basil? </span>
      <span id="f4086"> Why, I can&#39;t even recognize Grosvenor Square. </span>
      <span id="f4087"> I believe my house is somewhere about here, but I don&#39;t feel at all certain about it. </span>
      <span id="f4088"> I am sorry you are going away, as I have not seen you for ages. </span>
      <span id="f4089"> But I suppose you will be back soon?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4090">&#34;No:  I am going to be out of England for six months. </span>
      <span id="f4091"> I intend to take a studio in Paris and shut myself up till I have finished a great picture I have in my head. </span>
      <span id="f4092"> However, it wasn&#39;t about myself I wanted to talk. </span>
      <span id="f4093"> Here we are at your door. </span>
      <span id="f4094"> Let me come in for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f4095"> I have something to say to you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4096">&#34;I shall be charmed. </span>
      <span id="f4097"> But won&#39;t you miss your train?&#34; said Dorian Gray languidly as he passed up the steps and opened the door with his latch-key.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4098">The lamplight struggled out through the fog, and Hallward looked at his watch. </span>
      <span id="f4099"> &#34;I have heaps of time,&#34; he answered. </span>
      <span id="f4100"> &#34;The train doesn&#39;t go till twelve-fifteen, and it is only just eleven. </span>
      <span id="f4101"> In fact, I was on my way to the club to look for you, when I met you. </span>
      <span id="f4102"> You see, I shan&#39;t have any delay about luggage, as I have sent on my heavy things. </span>
      <span id="f4103"> All I have with me is in this bag, and I can easily get to Victoria in twenty minutes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4104">Dorian looked at him and smiled. </span>
      <span id="f4105"> &#34;What a way for a fashionable painter to travel! </span>
      <span id="f4106"> A Gladstone bag and an ulster! </span>
      <span id="f4107"> Come in, or the fog will get into the house. </span>
      <span id="f4108"> And mind you don&#39;t talk about anything serious. </span>
      <span id="f4109">Nothing is serious nowadays. </span>
      <span id="f4110"> At least nothing should be.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4111">Hallward shook his head, as he entered, and followed Dorian into the library. </span>
      <span id="f4112"> There was a bright wood fire blazing in the large open hearth. </span>
      <span id="f4113"> The lamps were lit, and an open Dutch silver spirit-case stood, with some siphons of soda-water and large cut-glass tumblers, on a little marqueterie table.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4114">&#34;You see your servant made me quite at home, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f4115"> He gave me everything I wanted, including your best gold-tipped cigarettes. </span>
      <span id="f4116"> He is a most hospitable creature. </span>
      <span id="f4117"> I like him much better than the Frenchman you used to have. </span>
      <span id="f4118"> What has become of the Frenchman, by the bye?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4119">Dorian shrugged his shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f4120"> &#34;I believe he married Lady Radley&#39;s maid, and has established her in Paris as an English dressmaker. </span>
      <span id="f4121">Anglomania is very fashionable over there now, I hear. </span>
      <span id="f4122"> It seems silly of the French, doesn&#39;t it? </span>
      <span id="f4123"> But--do you know?--he was not at all a bad servant. </span>
      <span id="f4124"> I never liked him, but I had nothing to complain about. </span>
      <span id="f4125"> One often imagines things that are quite absurd. </span>
      <span id="f4126"> He was really very devoted to me and seemed quite sorry when he went away. </span>
      <span id="f4127"> Have another brandy-and-soda? </span>
      <span id="f4128">Or would you like hock-and-seltzer? </span>
      <span id="f4129">I always take hock-and-seltzer myself. </span>
      <span id="f4130"> There is sure to be some in the next room.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4131">&#34;Thanks, I won&#39;t have anything more,&#34; said the painter, taking his cap and coat off and throwing them on the bag that he had placed in the corner. </span>
      <span id="f4132"> &#34;And now, my dear fellow, I want to speak to you seriously. </span>
      <span id="f4133">Don&#39;t frown like that. </span>
      <span id="f4134"> You make it so much more difficult for me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4135">&#34;What is it all about?&#34; cried Dorian in his petulant way, flinging himself down on the sofa. </span>
      <span id="f4136"> &#34;I hope it is not about myself. </span>
      <span id="f4137"> I am tired of myself to-night. </span>
      <span id="f4138">I should like to be somebody else.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4139">&#34;It is about yourself,&#34; answered Hallward in his grave deep voice, &#34;and I must say it to you. </span>
      <span id="f4140"> I shall only keep you half an hour.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4141">Dorian sighed and lit a cigarette. </span>
      <span id="f4142"> &#34;Half an hour!&#34; he murmured.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4143">&#34;It is not much to ask of you, Dorian, and it is entirely for your own sake that I am speaking. </span>
      <span id="f4144"> I think it right that you should know that the most dreadful things are being said against you in London.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4145">&#34;I don&#39;t wish to know anything about them. </span>
      <span id="f4146"> I love scandals about other people, but scandals about myself don&#39;t interest me. </span>
      <span id="f4147"> They have not got the charm of novelty.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4148">&#34;They must interest you, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f4149"> Every gentleman is interested in his good name. </span>
      <span id="f4150"> You don&#39;t want people to talk of you as something vile and degraded. </span>
      <span id="f4151"> Of course, you have your position, and your wealth, and all that kind of thing. </span>
      <span id="f4152"> But position and wealth are not everything. </span>
      <span id="f4153"> Mind you, I don&#39;t believe these rumours at all. </span>
      <span id="f4154"> At least, I can&#39;t believe them when I see you. </span>
      <span id="f4155"> Sin is a thing that writes itself across a man&#39;s face. </span>
      <span id="f4156"> It cannot be concealed. </span>
      <span id="f4157"> People talk sometimes of secret vices. </span>
      <span id="f4158">There are no such things. </span>
      <span id="f4159"> If a wretched man has a vice, it shows itself in the lines of his mouth, the droop of his eyelids, the moulding of his hands even. </span>
      <span id="f4160"> Somebody--I won&#39;t mention his name, but you know him--came to me last year to have his portrait done. </span>
      <span id="f4161"> I had never seen him before, and had never heard anything about him at the time, though I have heard a good deal since. </span>
      <span id="f4162"> He offered an extravagant price. </span>
      <span id="f4163"> I refused him. </span>
      <span id="f4164"> There was something in the shape of his fingers that I hated. </span>
      <span id="f4165"> I know now that I was quite right in what I fancied about him. </span>
      <span id="f4166"> His life is dreadful. </span>
      <span id="f4167"> But you, Dorian, with your pure, bright, innocent face, and your marvellous untroubled youth--I can&#39;t believe anything against you. </span>
      <span id="f4168"> And yet I see you very seldom, and you never come down to the studio now, and when I am away from you, and I hear all these hideous things that people are whispering about you, I don&#39;t know what to say. </span>
      <span id="f4169"> Why is it, Dorian, that a man like the Duke of Berwick leaves the room of a club when you enter it? </span>
      <span id="f4170"> Why is it that so many gentlemen in London will neither go to your house or invite you to theirs? </span>
      <span id="f4171"> You used to be a friend of Lord Staveley. </span>
      <span id="f4172"> I met him at dinner last week. </span>
      <span id="f4173"> Your name happened to come up in conversation, in connection with the miniatures you have lent to the exhibition at the Dudley. </span>
      <span id="f4174"> Staveley curled his lip and said that you might have the most artistic tastes, but that you were a man whom no pure-minded girl should be allowed to know, and whom no chaste woman should sit in the same room with. </span>
      <span id="f4175"> I reminded him that I was a friend of yours, and asked him what he meant. </span>
      <span id="f4176"> He told me. </span>
      <span id="f4177"> He told me right out before everybody. </span>
      <span id="f4178">It was horrible! </span>
      <span id="f4179"> Why is your friendship so fatal to young men? </span>
      <span id="f4180"> There was that wretched boy in the Guards who committed suicide. </span>
      <span id="f4181"> You were his great friend. </span>
      <span id="f4182"> There was Sir Henry Ashton, who had to leave England with a tarnished name. </span>
      <span id="f4183"> You and he were inseparable. </span>
      <span id="f4184"> What about Adrian Singleton and his dreadful end? </span>
      <span id="f4185"> What about Lord Kent&#39;s only son and his career? </span>
      <span id="f4186"> I met his father yesterday in St. </span>
      <span id="f4187">James&#39;s Street. </span>
      <span id="f4188"> He seemed broken with shame and sorrow. </span>
      <span id="f4189"> What about the young Duke of Perth? </span>
      <span id="f4190"> What sort of life has he got now? </span>
      <span id="f4191"> What gentleman would associate with him?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4192">&#34;Stop, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f4193"> You are talking about things of which you know nothing,&#34; said Dorian Gray, biting his lip, and with a note of infinite contempt in his voice. </span>
      <span id="f4194"> &#34;You ask me why Berwick leaves a room when I enter it. </span>
      <span id="f4195">It is because I know everything about his life, not because he knows anything about mine. </span>
      <span id="f4196"> With such blood as he has in his veins, how could his record be clean? </span>
      <span id="f4197"> You ask me about Henry Ashton and young Perth. </span>
      <span id="f4198">Did I teach the one his vices, and the other his debauchery? </span>
      <span id="f4199"> If Kent&#39;s silly son takes his wife from the streets, what is that to me? </span>
      <span id="f4200"> If Adrian Singleton writes his friend&#39;s name across a bill, am I his keeper? </span>
      <span id="f4201"> I know how people chatter in England. </span>
      <span id="f4202"> The middle classes air their moral prejudices over their gross dinner-tables, and whisper about what they call the profligacies of their betters in order to try and pretend that they are in smart society and on intimate terms with the people they slander. </span>
      <span id="f4203"> In this country, it is enough for a man to have distinction and brains for every common tongue to wag against him. </span>
      <span id="f4204">And what sort of lives do these people, who pose as being moral, lead themselves? </span>
      <span id="f4205"> My dear fellow, you forget that we are in the native land of the hypocrite.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4206">&#34;Dorian,&#34; cried Hallward, &#34;that is not the question. </span>
      <span id="f4207"> England is bad enough I know, and English society is all wrong. </span>
      <span id="f4208"> That is the reason why I want you to be fine. </span>
      <span id="f4209"> You have not been fine. </span>
      <span id="f4210"> One has a right to judge of a man by the effect he has over his friends. </span>
      <span id="f4211"> Yours seem to lose all sense of honour, of goodness, of purity. </span>
      <span id="f4212"> You have filled them with a madness for pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f4213"> They have gone down into the depths. </span>
      <span id="f4214"> You led them there. </span>
      <span id="f4215"> Yes:  you led them there, and yet you can smile, as you are smiling now. </span>
      <span id="f4216"> And there is worse behind. </span>
      <span id="f4217"> I know you and Harry are inseparable. </span>
      <span id="f4218"> Surely for that reason, if for none other, you should not have made his sister&#39;s name a by-word.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4219">&#34;Take care, Basil. </span>
      <span id="f4220"> You go too far.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4221">&#34;I must speak, and you must listen. </span>
      <span id="f4222"> You shall listen. </span>
      <span id="f4223"> When you met Lady Gwendolen, not a breath of scandal had ever touched her. </span>
      <span id="f4224"> Is there a single decent woman in London now who would drive with her in the park? </span>
      <span id="f4225"> Why, even her children are not allowed to live with her. </span>
      <span id="f4226"> Then there are other stories--stories that you have been seen creeping at dawn out of dreadful houses and slinking in disguise into the foulest dens in London. </span>
      <span id="f4227"> Are they true? </span>
      <span id="f4228"> Can they be true? </span>
      <span id="f4229"> When I first heard them, I laughed. </span>
      <span id="f4230"> I hear them now, and they make me shudder. </span>
      <span id="f4231"> What about your country-house and the life that is led there? </span>
      <span id="f4232"> Dorian, you don&#39;t know what is said about you. </span>
      <span id="f4233"> I won&#39;t tell you that I don&#39;t want to preach to you. </span>
      <span id="f4234"> I remember Harry saying once that every man who turned himself into an amateur curate for the moment always began by saying that, and then proceeded to break his word. </span>
      <span id="f4235"> I do want to preach to you. </span>
      <span id="f4236"> I want you to lead such a life as will make the world respect you. </span>
      <span id="f4237"> I want you to have a clean name and a fair record. </span>
      <span id="f4238"> I want you to get rid of the dreadful people you associate with. </span>
      <span id="f4239"> Don&#39;t shrug your shoulders like that. </span>
      <span id="f4240"> Don&#39;t be so indifferent. </span>
      <span id="f4241"> You have a wonderful influence. </span>
      <span id="f4242"> Let it be for good, not for evil. </span>
      <span id="f4243"> They say that you corrupt every one with whom you become intimate, and that it is quite sufficient for you to enter a house for shame of some kind to follow after. </span>
      <span id="f4244"> I don&#39;t know whether it is so or not. </span>
      <span id="f4245"> How should I know? </span>
      <span id="f4246"> But it is said of you. </span>
      <span id="f4247"> I am told things that it seems impossible to doubt. </span>
      <span id="f4248">Lord Gloucester was one of my greatest friends at Oxford. </span>
      <span id="f4249"> He showed me a letter that his wife had written to him when she was dying alone in her villa at Mentone. </span>
      <span id="f4250"> Your name was implicated in the most terrible confession I ever read. </span>
      <span id="f4251"> I told him that it was absurd--that I knew you thoroughly and that you were incapable of anything of the kind. </span>
      <span id="f4252"> Know you? </span>
      <span id="f4253"> I wonder do I know you? </span>
      <span id="f4254"> Before I could answer that, I should have to see your soul.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4255">&#34;To see my soul!&#34; muttered Dorian Gray, starting up from the sofa and turning almost white from fear.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4256">&#34;Yes,&#34; answered Hallward gravely, and with deep-toned sorrow in his voice, &#34;to see your soul. </span>
      <span id="f4257"> But only God can do that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4258">A bitter laugh of mockery broke from the lips of the younger man. </span>
      <span id="f4259"> &#34;You shall see it yourself, to-night!&#34; he cried, seizing a lamp from the table. </span>
      <span id="f4260"> &#34;Come:  it is your own handiwork. </span>
      <span id="f4261"> Why shouldn&#39;t you look at it? </span>
      <span id="f4262"> You can tell the world all about it afterwards, if you choose. </span>
      <span id="f4263">Nobody would believe you. </span>
      <span id="f4264"> If they did believe you, they would like me all the better for it. </span>
      <span id="f4265"> I know the age better than you do, though you will prate about it so tediously. </span>
      <span id="f4266"> Come, I tell you. </span>
      <span id="f4267"> You have chattered enough about corruption. </span>
      <span id="f4268"> Now you shall look on it face to face.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4269">There was the madness of pride in every word he uttered. </span>
      <span id="f4270"> He stamped his foot upon the ground in his boyish insolent manner. </span>
      <span id="f4271"> He felt a terrible joy at the thought that some one else was to share his secret, and that the man who had painted the portrait that was the origin of all his shame was to be burdened for the rest of his life with the hideous memory of what he had done.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4272">&#34;Yes,&#34; he continued, coming closer to him and looking steadfastly into his stern eyes, &#34;I shall show you my soul. </span>
      <span id="f4273"> You shall see the thing that you fancy only God can see.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4274">Hallward started back. </span>
      <span id="f4275"> &#34;This is blasphemy, Dorian!&#34; he cried. </span>
      <span id="f4276"> &#34;You must not say things like that. </span>
      <span id="f4277"> They are horrible, and they don&#39;t mean anything.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4278">&#34;You think so?&#34;  He laughed again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4279">&#34;I know so. </span>
      <span id="f4280"> As for what I said to you to-night, I said it for your good. </span>
      <span id="f4281"> You know I have been always a stanch friend to you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4282">&#34;Don&#39;t touch me. </span>
      <span id="f4283"> Finish what you have to say.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4284">A twisted flash of pain shot across the painter&#39;s face. </span>
      <span id="f4285"> He paused for a moment, and a wild feeling of pity came over him. </span>
      <span id="f4286"> After all, what right had he to pry into the life of Dorian Gray? </span>
      <span id="f4287"> If he had done a tithe of what was rumoured about him, how much he must have suffered! </span>
      <span id="f4288">Then he straightened himself up, and walked over to the fire-place, and stood there, looking at the burning logs with their frostlike ashes and their throbbing cores of flame.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4289">&#34;I am waiting, Basil,&#34; said the young man in a hard clear voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4290">He turned round. </span>
      <span id="f4291"> &#34;What I have to say is this,&#34; he cried. </span>
      <span id="f4292"> &#34;You must give me some answer to these horrible charges that are made against you. </span>
      <span id="f4293"> If you tell me that they are absolutely untrue from beginning to end, I shall believe you. </span>
      <span id="f4294"> Deny them, Dorian, deny them! </span>
      <span id="f4295"> Can&#39;t you see what I am going through? </span>
      <span id="f4296"> My God! </span>
      <span id="f4297">don&#39;t tell me that you are bad, and corrupt, and shameful.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4298">Dorian Gray smiled. </span>
      <span id="f4299"> There was a curl of contempt in his lips. </span>
      <span id="f4300"> &#34;Come upstairs, Basil,&#34; he said quietly. </span>
      <span id="f4301"> &#34;I keep a diary of my life from day to day, and it never leaves the room in which it is written. </span>
      <span id="f4302"> I shall show it to you if you come with me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4303">&#34;I shall come with you, Dorian, if you wish it. </span>
      <span id="f4304"> I see I have missed my train. </span>
      <span id="f4305"> That makes no matter. </span>
      <span id="f4306"> I can go to-morrow. </span>
      <span id="f4307">But don&#39;t ask me to read anything to-night. </span>
      <span id="f4308">All I want is a plain answer to my question.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4309">&#34;That shall be given to you upstairs. </span>
      <span id="f4310"> I could not give it here. </span>
      <span id="f4311"> You will not have to read long.&#34;</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>