<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f4312">CHAPTER 13</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f4313">He passed out of the room and began the ascent, Basil Hallward following close behind. </span>
      <span id="f4314"> They walked softly, as men do instinctively at night. </span>
      <span id="f4315"> The lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase. </span>
      <span id="f4316"> A rising wind made some of the windows rattle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4317">When they reached the top landing, Dorian set the lamp down on the floor, and taking out the key, turned it in the lock. </span>
      <span id="f4318"> &#34;You insist on knowing, Basil?&#34; he asked in a low voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4319">&#34;Yes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4320">&#34;I am delighted,&#34; he answered, smiling. </span>
      <span id="f4321"> Then he added, somewhat harshly, &#34;You are the one man in the world who is entitled to know everything about me. </span>
      <span id="f4322"> You have had more to do with my life than you think&#34;; and, taking up the lamp, he opened the door and went in. </span>
      <span id="f4323"> A cold current of air passed them, and the light shot up for a moment in a flame of murky orange. </span>
      <span id="f4324"> He shuddered. </span>
      <span id="f4325"> &#34;Shut the door behind you,&#34; he whispered, as he placed the lamp on the table.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4326">Hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expression. </span>
      <span id="f4327"> The room looked as if it had not been lived in for years. </span>
      <span id="f4328"> A faded Flemish tapestry, a curtained picture, an old Italian _cassone_, and an almost empty book-case--that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and a table. </span>
      <span id="f4329"> As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle that was standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place was covered with dust and that the carpet was in holes. </span>
      <span id="f4330"> A mouse ran scuffling behind the wainscoting. </span>
      <span id="f4331"> There was a damp odour of mildew.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4332">&#34;So you think that it is only God who sees the soul, Basil? </span>
      <span id="f4333"> Draw that curtain back, and you will see mine.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4334">The voice that spoke was cold and cruel. </span>
      <span id="f4335"> &#34;You are mad, Dorian, or playing a part,&#34; muttered Hallward, frowning.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4336">&#34;You won&#39;t? </span>
      <span id="f4337">Then I must do it myself,&#34; said the young man, and he tore the curtain from its rod and flung it on the ground.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4338">An exclamation of horror broke from the painter&#39;s lips as he saw in the dim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning at him. </span>
      <span id="f4339"> There was something in its expression that filled him with disgust and loathing. </span>
      <span id="f4340">Good heavens! </span>
      <span id="f4341">it was Dorian Gray&#39;s own face that he was looking at! </span>
      <span id="f4342">The horror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely spoiled that marvellous beauty. </span>
      <span id="f4343"> There was still some gold in the thinning hair and some scarlet on the sensual mouth. </span>
      <span id="f4344"> The sodden eyes had kept something of the loveliness of their blue, the noble curves had not yet completely passed away from chiselled nostrils and from plastic throat. </span>
      <span id="f4345">Yes, it was Dorian himself. </span>
      <span id="f4346"> But who had done it? </span>
      <span id="f4347"> He seemed to recognize his own brushwork, and the frame was his own design. </span>
      <span id="f4348"> The idea was monstrous, yet he felt afraid. </span>
      <span id="f4349"> He seized the lighted candle, and held it to the picture. </span>
      <span id="f4350"> In the left-hand corner was his own name, traced in long letters of bright vermilion.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4351">It was some foul parody, some infamous ignoble satire. </span>
      <span id="f4352"> He had never done that. </span>
      <span id="f4353"> Still, it was his own picture. </span>
      <span id="f4354"> He knew it, and he felt as if his blood had changed in a moment from fire to sluggish ice. </span>
      <span id="f4355"> His own picture! </span>
      <span id="f4356"> What did it mean? </span>
      <span id="f4357"> Why had it altered? </span>
      <span id="f4358"> He turned and looked at Dorian Gray with the eyes of a sick man. </span>
      <span id="f4359"> His mouth twitched, and his parched tongue seemed unable to articulate. </span>
      <span id="f4360"> He passed his hand across his forehead. </span>
      <span id="f4361"> It was dank with clammy sweat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4362">The young man was leaning against the mantelshelf, watching him with that strange expression that one sees on the faces of those who are absorbed in a play when some great artist is acting. </span>
      <span id="f4363"> There was neither real sorrow in it nor real joy. </span>
      <span id="f4364"> There was simply the passion of the spectator, with perhaps a flicker of triumph in his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f4365"> He had taken the flower out of his coat, and was smelling it, or pretending to do so.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4366">&#34;What does this mean?&#34; cried Hallward, at last. </span>
      <span id="f4367"> His own voice sounded shrill and curious in his ears.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4368">&#34;Years ago, when I was a boy,&#34; said Dorian Gray, crushing the flower in his hand, &#34;you met me, flattered me, and taught me to be vain of my good looks. </span>
      <span id="f4369"> One day you introduced me to a friend of yours, who explained to me the wonder of youth, and you finished a portrait of me that revealed to me the wonder of beauty. </span>
      <span id="f4370"> In a mad moment that, even now, I don&#39;t know whether I regret or not, I made a wish, perhaps you would call it a prayer....&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4371">&#34;I remember it! </span>
      <span id="f4372"> Oh, how well I remember it! </span>
      <span id="f4373"> No! </span>
      <span id="f4374">the thing is impossible. </span>
      <span id="f4375"> The room is damp. </span>
      <span id="f4376"> Mildew has got into the canvas. </span>
      <span id="f4377"> The paints I used had some wretched mineral poison in them. </span>
      <span id="f4378"> I tell you the thing is impossible.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4379">&#34;Ah, what is impossible?&#34; murmured the young man, going over to the window and leaning his forehead against the cold, mist-stained glass.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4380">&#34;You told me you had destroyed it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4381">&#34;I was wrong. </span>
      <span id="f4382"> It has destroyed me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4383">&#34;I don&#39;t believe it is my picture.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4384">&#34;Can&#39;t you see your ideal in it?&#34; said Dorian bitterly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4385">&#34;My ideal, as you call it...&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4386">&#34;As you called it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4387">&#34;There was nothing evil in it, nothing shameful. </span>
      <span id="f4388"> You were to me such an ideal as I shall never meet again. </span>
      <span id="f4389"> This is the face of a satyr.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4390">&#34;It is the face of my soul.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4391">&#34;Christ! </span>
      <span id="f4392">what a thing I must have worshipped! </span>
      <span id="f4393"> It has the eyes of a devil.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4394">&#34;Each of us has heaven and hell in him, Basil,&#34; cried Dorian with a wild gesture of despair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4395">Hallward turned again to the portrait and gazed at it. </span>
      <span id="f4396"> &#34;My God! </span>
      <span id="f4397"> If it is true,&#34; he exclaimed, &#34;and this is what you have done with your life, why, you must be worse even than those who talk against you fancy you to be!&#34; He held the light up again to the canvas and examined it. </span>
      <span id="f4398"> The surface seemed to be quite undisturbed and as he had left it. </span>
      <span id="f4399"> It was from within, apparently, that the foulness and horror had come. </span>
      <span id="f4400">Through some strange quickening of inner life the leprosies of sin were slowly eating the thing away. </span>
      <span id="f4401"> The rotting of a corpse in a watery grave was not so fearful.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4402">His hand shook, and the candle fell from its socket on the floor and lay there sputtering. </span>
      <span id="f4403"> He placed his foot on it and put it out. </span>
      <span id="f4404"> Then he flung himself into the rickety chair that was standing by the table and buried his face in his hands.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4405">&#34;Good God, Dorian, what a lesson! </span>
      <span id="f4406"> What an awful lesson!&#34; There was no answer, but he could hear the young man sobbing at the window. </span>
      <span id="f4407"> &#34;Pray, Dorian, pray,&#34; he murmured. </span>
      <span id="f4408"> &#34;What is it that one was taught to say in one&#39;s boyhood? </span>
      <span id="f4409"> &#39;Lead us not into temptation. </span>
      <span id="f4410"> Forgive us our sins. </span>
      <span id="f4411">Wash away our iniquities.&#39;  Let us say that together. </span>
      <span id="f4412"> The prayer of your pride has been answered. </span>
      <span id="f4413"> The prayer of your repentance will be answered also. </span>
      <span id="f4414"> I worshipped you too much. </span>
      <span id="f4415"> I am punished for it. </span>
      <span id="f4416"> You worshipped yourself too much. </span>
      <span id="f4417"> We are both punished.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4418">Dorian Gray turned slowly around and looked at him with tear-dimmed eyes. </span>
      <span id="f4419"> &#34;It is too late, Basil,&#34; he faltered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4420">&#34;It is never too late, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f4421"> Let us kneel down and try if we cannot remember a prayer. </span>
      <span id="f4422"> Isn&#39;t there a verse somewhere, &#39;Though your sins be as scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow&#39;?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4423">&#34;Those words mean nothing to me now.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4424">&#34;Hush! </span>
      <span id="f4425"> Don&#39;t say that. </span>
      <span id="f4426"> You have done enough evil in your life. </span>
      <span id="f4427"> My God! </span>
      <span id="f4428"> Don&#39;t you see that accursed thing leering at us?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4429">Dorian Gray glanced at the picture, and suddenly an uncontrollable feeling of hatred for Basil Hallward came over him, as though it had been suggested to him by the image on the canvas, whispered into his ear by those grinning lips. </span>
      <span id="f4430"> The mad passions of a hunted animal stirred within him, and he loathed the man who was seated at the table, more than in his whole life he had ever loathed anything. </span>
      <span id="f4431"> He glanced wildly around. </span>
      <span id="f4432"> Something glimmered on the top of the painted chest that faced him. </span>
      <span id="f4433"> His eye fell on it. </span>
      <span id="f4434"> He knew what it was. </span>
      <span id="f4435"> It was a knife that he had brought up, some days before, to cut a piece of cord, and had forgotten to take away with him. </span>
      <span id="f4436"> He moved slowly towards it, passing Hallward as he did so. </span>
      <span id="f4437"> As soon as he got behind him, he seized it and turned round. </span>
      <span id="f4438"> Hallward stirred in his chair as if he was going to rise. </span>
      <span id="f4439"> He rushed at him and dug the knife into the great vein that is behind the ear, crushing the man&#39;s head down on the table and stabbing again and again.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4440">There was a stifled groan and the horrible sound of some one choking with blood. </span>
      <span id="f4441"> Three times the outstretched arms shot up convulsively, waving grotesque, stiff-fingered hands in the air. </span>
      <span id="f4442"> He stabbed him twice more, but the man did not move. </span>
      <span id="f4443"> Something began to trickle on the floor. </span>
      <span id="f4444"> He waited for a moment, still pressing the head down. </span>
      <span id="f4445"> Then he threw the knife on the table, and listened.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4446">He could hear nothing, but the drip, drip on the threadbare carpet. </span>
      <span id="f4447"> He opened the door and went out on the landing. </span>
      <span id="f4448"> The house was absolutely quiet. </span>
      <span id="f4449"> No one was about. </span>
      <span id="f4450"> For a few seconds he stood bending over the balustrade and peering down into the black seething well of darkness. </span>
      <span id="f4451">Then he took out the key and returned to the room, locking himself in as he did so.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4452">The thing was still seated in the chair, straining over the table with bowed head, and humped back, and long fantastic arms. </span>
      <span id="f4453"> Had it not been for the red jagged tear in the neck and the clotted black pool that was slowly widening on the table, one would have said that the man was simply asleep.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4454">How quickly it had all been done! </span>
      <span id="f4455"> He felt strangely calm, and walking over to the window, opened it and stepped out on the balcony. </span>
      <span id="f4456"> The wind had blown the fog away, and the sky was like a monstrous peacock&#39;s tail, starred with myriads of golden eyes. </span>
      <span id="f4457"> He looked down and saw the policeman going his rounds and flashing the long beam of his lantern on the doors of the silent houses. </span>
      <span id="f4458"> The crimson spot of a prowling hansom gleamed at the corner and then vanished. </span>
      <span id="f4459"> A woman in a fluttering shawl was creeping slowly by the railings, staggering as she went. </span>
      <span id="f4460"> Now and then she stopped and peered back. </span>
      <span id="f4461"> Once, she began to sing in a hoarse voice. </span>
      <span id="f4462"> The policeman strolled over and said something to her. </span>
      <span id="f4463"> She stumbled away, laughing. </span>
      <span id="f4464"> A bitter blast swept across the square. </span>
      <span id="f4465"> The gas-lamps flickered and became blue, and the leafless trees shook their black iron branches to and fro. </span>
      <span id="f4466"> He shivered and went back, closing the window behind him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4467">Having reached the door, he turned the key and opened it. </span>
      <span id="f4468"> He did not even glance at the murdered man. </span>
      <span id="f4469"> He felt that the secret of the whole thing was not to realize the situation. </span>
      <span id="f4470"> The friend who had painted the fatal portrait to which all his misery had been due had gone out of his life. </span>
      <span id="f4471"> That was enough.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4472">Then he remembered the lamp. </span>
      <span id="f4473"> It was a rather curious one of Moorish workmanship, made of dull silver inlaid with arabesques of burnished steel, and studded with coarse turquoises. </span>
      <span id="f4474"> Perhaps it might be missed by his servant, and questions would be asked. </span>
      <span id="f4475"> He hesitated for a moment, then he turned back and took it from the table. </span>
      <span id="f4476"> He could not help seeing the dead thing. </span>
      <span id="f4477"> How still it was! </span>
      <span id="f4478"> How horribly white the long hands looked! </span>
      <span id="f4479"> It was like a dreadful wax image.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4480">Having locked the door behind him, he crept quietly downstairs. </span>
      <span id="f4481"> The woodwork creaked and seemed to cry out as if in pain. </span>
      <span id="f4482"> He stopped several times and waited. </span>
      <span id="f4483"> No:  everything was still. </span>
      <span id="f4484"> It was merely the sound of his own footsteps.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4485">When he reached the library, he saw the bag and coat in the corner. </span>
      <span id="f4486">They must be hidden away somewhere. </span>
      <span id="f4487"> He unlocked a secret press that was in the wainscoting, a press in which he kept his own curious disguises, and put them into it. </span>
      <span id="f4488"> He could easily burn them afterwards. </span>
      <span id="f4489">Then he pulled out his watch. </span>
      <span id="f4490"> It was twenty minutes to two.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4491">He sat down and began to think. </span>
      <span id="f4492"> Every year--every month, almost--men were strangled in England for what he had done. </span>
      <span id="f4493"> There had been a madness of murder in the air. </span>
      <span id="f4494"> Some red star had come too close to the earth.... </span>
      <span id="f4495">And yet, what evidence was there against him? </span>
      <span id="f4496"> Basil Hallward had left the house at eleven. </span>
      <span id="f4497"> No one had seen him come in again. </span>
      <span id="f4498"> Most of the servants were at Selby Royal. </span>
      <span id="f4499"> His valet had gone to bed.... </span>
      <span id="f4500">Paris! </span>
      <span id="f4501"> Yes. </span>
      <span id="f4502"> It was to Paris that Basil had gone, and by the midnight train, as he had intended. </span>
      <span id="f4503"> With his curious reserved habits, it would be months before any suspicions would be roused. </span>
      <span id="f4504"> Months! </span>
      <span id="f4505"> Everything could be destroyed long before then.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4506">A sudden thought struck him. </span>
      <span id="f4507"> He put on his fur coat and hat and went out into the hall. </span>
      <span id="f4508"> There he paused, hearing the slow heavy tread of the policeman on the pavement outside and seeing the flash of the bull&#39;s-eye reflected in the window. </span>
      <span id="f4509"> He waited and held his breath.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4510">After a few moments he drew back the latch and slipped out, shutting the door very gently behind him. </span>
      <span id="f4511"> Then he began ringing the bell. </span>
      <span id="f4512"> In about five minutes his valet appeared, half-dressed and looking very drowsy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4513">&#34;I am sorry to have had to wake you up, Francis,&#34; he said, stepping in; &#34;but I had forgotten my latch-key. </span>
      <span id="f4514">What time is it?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4515">&#34;Ten minutes past two, sir,&#34; answered the man, looking at the clock and blinking.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4516">&#34;Ten minutes past two? </span>
      <span id="f4517"> How horribly late! </span>
      <span id="f4518"> You must wake me at nine to-morrow. </span>
      <span id="f4519">I have some work to do.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4520">&#34;All right, sir.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4521">&#34;Did any one call this evening?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4522">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4523">Hallward, sir. </span>
      <span id="f4524"> He stayed here till eleven, and then he went away to catch his train.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4525">&#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f4526"> I am sorry I didn&#39;t see him. </span>
      <span id="f4527"> Did he leave any message?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4528">&#34;No, sir, except that he would write to you from Paris, if he did not find you at the club.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4529">&#34;That will do, Francis. </span>
      <span id="f4530"> Don&#39;t forget to call me at nine to-morrow.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4531">&#34;No, sir.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4532">The man shambled down the passage in his slippers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4533">Dorian Gray threw his hat and coat upon the table and passed into the library. </span>
      <span id="f4534"> For a quarter of an hour he walked up and down the room, biting his lip and thinking. </span>
      <span id="f4535"> Then he took down the Blue Book from one of the shelves and began to turn over the leaves. </span>
      <span id="f4536"> &#34;Alan Campbell, 152, Hertford Street, Mayfair.&#34;  Yes; that was the man he wanted.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>