<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER 14</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f4537">CHAPTER 14</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f4538">At nine o&#39;clock the next morning his servant came in with a cup of chocolate on a tray and opened the shutters. </span>
      <span id="f4539"> Dorian was sleeping quite peacefully, lying on his right side, with one hand underneath his cheek. </span>
      <span id="f4540"> He looked like a boy who had been tired out with play, or study.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4541">The man had to touch him twice on the shoulder before he woke, and as he opened his eyes a faint smile passed across his lips, as though he had been lost in some delightful dream. </span>
      <span id="f4542"> Yet he had not dreamed at all. </span>
      <span id="f4543">His night had been untroubled by any images of pleasure or of pain. </span>
      <span id="f4544">But youth smiles without any reason. </span>
      <span id="f4545"> It is one of its chiefest charms.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4546">He turned round, and leaning upon his elbow, began to sip his chocolate. </span>
      <span id="f4547"> The mellow November sun came streaming into the room. </span>
      <span id="f4548"> The sky was bright, and there was a genial warmth in the air. </span>
      <span id="f4549"> It was almost like a morning in May.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4550">Gradually the events of the preceding night crept with silent, blood-stained feet into his brain and reconstructed themselves there with terrible distinctness. </span>
      <span id="f4551"> He winced at the memory of all that he had suffered, and for a moment the same curious feeling of loathing for Basil Hallward that had made him kill him as he sat in the chair came back to him, and he grew cold with passion. </span>
      <span id="f4552"> The dead man was still sitting there, too, and in the sunlight now. </span>
      <span id="f4553"> How horrible that was! </span>
      <span id="f4554">Such hideous things were for the darkness, not for the day.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4555">He felt that if he brooded on what he had gone through he would sicken or grow mad. </span>
      <span id="f4556"> There were sins whose fascination was more in the memory than in the doing of them, strange triumphs that gratified the pride more than the passions, and gave to the intellect a quickened sense of joy, greater than any joy they brought, or could ever bring, to the senses. </span>
      <span id="f4557"> But this was not one of them. </span>
      <span id="f4558"> It was a thing to be driven out of the mind, to be drugged with poppies, to be strangled lest it might strangle one itself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4559">When the half-hour struck, he passed his hand across his forehead, and then got up hastily and dressed himself with even more than his usual care, giving a good deal of attention to the choice of his necktie and scarf-pin and changing his rings more than once. </span>
      <span id="f4560"> He spent a long time also over breakfast, tasting the various dishes, talking to his valet about some new liveries that he was thinking of getting made for the servants at Selby, and going through his correspondence. </span>
      <span id="f4561"> At some of the letters, he smiled. </span>
      <span id="f4562"> Three of them bored him. </span>
      <span id="f4563"> One he read several times over and then tore up with a slight look of annoyance in his face. </span>
      <span id="f4564"> &#34;That awful thing, a woman&#39;s memory!&#34; as Lord Henry had once said.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4565">After he had drunk his cup of black coffee, he wiped his lips slowly with a napkin, motioned to his servant to wait, and going over to the table, sat down and wrote two letters. </span>
      <span id="f4566"> One he put in his pocket, the other he handed to the valet.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4567">&#34;Take this round to 152, Hertford Street, Francis, and if Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4568">Campbell is out of town, get his address.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4569">As soon as he was alone, he lit a cigarette and began sketching upon a piece of paper, drawing first flowers and bits of architecture, and then human faces. </span>
      <span id="f4570"> Suddenly he remarked that every face that he drew seemed to have a fantastic likeness to Basil Hallward. </span>
      <span id="f4571"> He frowned, and getting up, went over to the book-case and took out a volume at hazard. </span>
      <span id="f4572">He was determined that he would not think about what had happened until it became absolutely necessary that he should do so.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4573">When he had stretched himself on the sofa, he looked at the title-page of the book. </span>
      <span id="f4574"> It was Gautier&#39;s Emaux et Camees, Charpentier&#39;s Japanese-paper edition, with the Jacquemart etching. </span>
      <span id="f4575"> The binding was of citron-green leather, with a design of gilt trellis-work and dotted pomegranates. </span>
      <span id="f4576"> It had been given to him by Adrian Singleton. </span>
      <span id="f4577"> As he turned over the pages, his eye fell on the poem about the hand of Lacenaire, the cold yellow hand &#34;_du supplice encore mal lavee_,&#34; with its downy red hairs and its &#34;_doigts de faune_.&#34;  He glanced at his own white taper fingers, shuddering slightly in spite of himself, and passed on, till he came to those lovely stanzas upon Venice:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4578">Sur une gamme chromatique,        Le sein de perles ruisselant,      La Venus de l&#39;Adriatique        Sort de l&#39;eau son corps rose et blanc.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4579">Les domes, sur l&#39;azur des ondes        Suivant la phrase au pur contour,      S&#39;enflent comme des gorges rondes        Que souleve un soupir d&#39;amour.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4580">L&#39;esquif aborde et me depose,        Jetant son amarre au pilier,      Devant une facade rose,        Sur le marbre d&#39;un escalier.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4581">How exquisite they were! </span>
      <span id="f4582"> As one read them, one seemed to be floating down the green water-ways of the pink and pearl city, seated in a black gondola with silver prow and trailing curtains. </span>
      <span id="f4583"> The mere lines looked to him like those straight lines of turquoise-blue that follow one as one pushes out to the Lido. </span>
      <span id="f4584"> The sudden flashes of colour reminded him of the gleam of the opal-and-iris-throated birds that flutter round the tall honeycombed Campanile, or stalk, with such stately grace, through the dim, dust-stained arcades. </span>
      <span id="f4585"> Leaning back with half-closed eyes, he kept saying over and over to himself:</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4586">&#34;Devant une facade rose,         Sur le marbre d&#39;un escalier.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4587">The whole of Venice was in those two lines. </span>
      <span id="f4588"> He remembered the autumn that he had passed there, and a wonderful love that had stirred him to mad delightful follies. </span>
      <span id="f4589"> There was romance in every place. </span>
      <span id="f4590"> But Venice, like Oxford, had kept the background for romance, and, to the true romantic, background was everything, or almost everything. </span>
      <span id="f4591"> Basil had been with him part of the time, and had gone wild over Tintoret. </span>
      <span id="f4592"> Poor Basil! </span>
      <span id="f4593"> What a horrible way for a man to die!</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4594">He sighed, and took up the volume again, and tried to forget. </span>
      <span id="f4595"> He read of the swallows that fly in and out of the little _cafe_ at Smyrna where the Hadjis sit counting their amber beads and the turbaned merchants smoke their long tasselled pipes and talk gravely to each other; he read of the Obelisk in the Place de la Concorde that weeps tears of granite in its lonely sunless exile and longs to be back by the hot, lotus-covered Nile, where there are Sphinxes, and rose-red ibises, and white vultures with gilded claws, and crocodiles with small beryl eyes that crawl over the green steaming mud; he began to brood over those verses which, drawing music from kiss-stained marble, tell of that curious statue that Gautier compares to a contralto voice, the &#34;_monstre charmant_&#34; that couches in the porphyry-room of the Louvre. </span>
      <span id="f4596"> But after a time the book fell from his hand. </span>
      <span id="f4597"> He grew nervous, and a horrible fit of terror came over him. </span>
      <span id="f4598"> What if Alan Campbell should be out of England? </span>
      <span id="f4599"> Days would elapse before he could come back. </span>
      <span id="f4600"> Perhaps he might refuse to come. </span>
      <span id="f4601"> What could he do then? </span>
      <span id="f4602"> Every moment was of vital importance.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4603">They had been great friends once, five years before--almost inseparable, indeed. </span>
      <span id="f4604"> Then the intimacy had come suddenly to an end. </span>
      <span id="f4605">When they met in society now, it was only Dorian Gray who smiled:  Alan Campbell never did.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4606">He was an extremely clever young man, though he had no real appreciation of the visible arts, and whatever little sense of the beauty of poetry he possessed he had gained entirely from Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f4607"> His dominant intellectual passion was for science. </span>
      <span id="f4608"> At Cambridge he had spent a great deal of his time working in the laboratory, and had taken a good class in the Natural Science Tripos of his year. </span>
      <span id="f4609"> Indeed, he was still devoted to the study of chemistry, and had a laboratory of his own in which he used to shut himself up all day long, greatly to the annoyance of his mother, who had set her heart on his standing for Parliament and had a vague idea that a chemist was a person who made up prescriptions. </span>
      <span id="f4610"> He was an excellent musician, however, as well, and played both the violin and the piano better than most amateurs. </span>
      <span id="f4611"> In fact, it was music that had first brought him and Dorian Gray together--music and that indefinable attraction that Dorian seemed to be able to exercise whenever he wished--and, indeed, exercised often without being conscious of it. </span>
      <span id="f4612"> They had met at Lady Berkshire&#39;s the night that Rubinstein played there, and after that used to be always seen together at the opera and wherever good music was going on. </span>
      <span id="f4613"> For eighteen months their intimacy lasted. </span>
      <span id="f4614"> Campbell was always either at Selby Royal or in Grosvenor Square. </span>
      <span id="f4615"> To him, as to many others, Dorian Gray was the type of everything that is wonderful and fascinating in life. </span>
      <span id="f4616"> Whether or not a quarrel had taken place between them no one ever knew. </span>
      <span id="f4617"> But suddenly people remarked that they scarcely spoke when they met and that Campbell seemed always to go away early from any party at which Dorian Gray was present. </span>
      <span id="f4618"> He had changed, too--was strangely melancholy at times, appeared almost to dislike hearing music, and would never himself play, giving as his excuse, when he was called upon, that he was so absorbed in science that he had no time left in which to practise. </span>
      <span id="f4619"> And this was certainly true. </span>
      <span id="f4620"> Every day he seemed to become more interested in biology, and his name appeared once or twice in some of the scientific reviews in connection with certain curious experiments.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4621">This was the man Dorian Gray was waiting for. </span>
      <span id="f4622"> Every second he kept glancing at the clock. </span>
      <span id="f4623"> As the minutes went by he became horribly agitated. </span>
      <span id="f4624"> At last he got up and began to pace up and down the room, looking like a beautiful caged thing. </span>
      <span id="f4625"> He took long stealthy strides. </span>
      <span id="f4626">His hands were curiously cold.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4627">The suspense became unbearable. </span>
      <span id="f4628"> Time seemed to him to be crawling with feet of lead, while he by monstrous winds was being swept towards the jagged edge of some black cleft of precipice. </span>
      <span id="f4629"> He knew what was waiting for him there; saw it, indeed, and, shuddering, crushed with dank hands his burning lids as though he would have robbed the very brain of sight and driven the eyeballs back into their cave. </span>
      <span id="f4630"> It was useless. </span>
      <span id="f4631"> The brain had its own food on which it battened, and the imagination, made grotesque by terror, twisted and distorted as a living thing by pain, danced like some foul puppet on a stand and grinned through moving masks. </span>
      <span id="f4632"> Then, suddenly, time stopped for him. </span>
      <span id="f4633"> Yes:  that blind, slow-breathing thing crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, time being dead, raced nimbly on in front, and dragged a hideous future from its grave, and showed it to him. </span>
      <span id="f4634"> He stared at it. </span>
      <span id="f4635"> Its very horror made him stone.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4636">At last the door opened and his servant entered. </span>
      <span id="f4637"> He turned glazed eyes upon him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4638">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4639">Campbell, sir,&#34; said the man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4640">A sigh of relief broke from his parched lips, and the colour came back to his cheeks.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4641">&#34;Ask him to come in at once, Francis.&#34;  He felt that he was himself again. </span>
      <span id="f4642"> His mood of cowardice had passed away.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4643">The man bowed and retired. </span>
      <span id="f4644"> In a few moments, Alan Campbell walked in, looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor being intensified by his coal-black hair and dark eyebrows.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4645">&#34;Alan! </span>
      <span id="f4646"> This is kind of you. </span>
      <span id="f4647"> I thank you for coming.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4648">&#34;I had intended never to enter your house again, Gray. </span>
      <span id="f4649"> But you said it was a matter of life and death.&#34;  His voice was hard and cold. </span>
      <span id="f4650"> He spoke with slow deliberation. </span>
      <span id="f4651"> There was a look of contempt in the steady searching gaze that he turned on Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f4652"> He kept his hands in the pockets of his Astrakhan coat, and seemed not to have noticed the gesture with which he had been greeted.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4653">&#34;Yes:  it is a matter of life and death, Alan, and to more than one person. </span>
      <span id="f4654"> Sit down.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4655">Campbell took a chair by the table, and Dorian sat opposite to him. </span>
      <span id="f4656">The two men&#39;s eyes met. </span>
      <span id="f4657"> In Dorian&#39;s there was infinite pity. </span>
      <span id="f4658"> He knew that what he was going to do was dreadful.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4659">After a strained moment of silence, he leaned across and said, very quietly, but watching the effect of each word upon the face of him he had sent for, &#34;Alan, in a locked room at the top of this house, a room to which nobody but myself has access, a dead man is seated at a table. </span>
      <span id="f4660">He has been dead ten hours now. </span>
      <span id="f4661"> Don&#39;t stir, and don&#39;t look at me like that. </span>
      <span id="f4662"> Who the man is, why he died, how he died, are matters that do not concern you. </span>
      <span id="f4663"> What you have to do is this--&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4664">&#34;Stop, Gray. </span>
      <span id="f4665"> I don&#39;t want to know anything further. </span>
      <span id="f4666"> Whether what you have told me is true or not true doesn&#39;t concern me. </span>
      <span id="f4667"> I entirely decline to be mixed up in your life. </span>
      <span id="f4668"> Keep your horrible secrets to yourself. </span>
      <span id="f4669"> They don&#39;t interest me any more.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4670">&#34;Alan, they will have to interest you. </span>
      <span id="f4671"> This one will have to interest you. </span>
      <span id="f4672"> I am awfully sorry for you, Alan. </span>
      <span id="f4673"> But I can&#39;t help myself. </span>
      <span id="f4674"> You are the one man who is able to save me. </span>
      <span id="f4675"> I am forced to bring you into the matter. </span>
      <span id="f4676"> I have no option. </span>
      <span id="f4677"> Alan, you are scientific. </span>
      <span id="f4678"> You know about chemistry and things of that kind. </span>
      <span id="f4679"> You have made experiments. </span>
      <span id="f4680">What you have got to do is to destroy the thing that is upstairs--to destroy it so that not a vestige of it will be left. </span>
      <span id="f4681"> Nobody saw this person come into the house. </span>
      <span id="f4682"> Indeed, at the present moment he is supposed to be in Paris. </span>
      <span id="f4683"> He will not be missed for months. </span>
      <span id="f4684"> When he is missed, there must be no trace of him found here. </span>
      <span id="f4685"> You, Alan, you must change him, and everything that belongs to him, into a handful of ashes that I may scatter in the air.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4686">&#34;You are mad, Dorian.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4687">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f4688"> I was waiting for you to call me Dorian.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4689">&#34;You are mad, I tell you--mad to imagine that I would raise a finger to help you, mad to make this monstrous confession. </span>
      <span id="f4690"> I will have nothing to do with this matter, whatever it is. </span>
      <span id="f4691"> Do you think I am going to peril my reputation for you? </span>
      <span id="f4692"> What is it to me what devil&#39;s work you are up to?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4693">&#34;It was suicide, Alan.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4694">&#34;I am glad of that. </span>
      <span id="f4695"> But who drove him to it? </span>
      <span id="f4696"> You, I should fancy.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4697">&#34;Do you still refuse to do this for me?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4698">&#34;Of course I refuse. </span>
      <span id="f4699"> I will have absolutely nothing to do with it. </span>
      <span id="f4700"> I don&#39;t care what shame comes on you. </span>
      <span id="f4701"> You deserve it all. </span>
      <span id="f4702"> I should not be sorry to see you disgraced, publicly disgraced. </span>
      <span id="f4703"> How dare you ask me, of all men in the world, to mix myself up in this horror? </span>
      <span id="f4704"> I should have thought you knew more about people&#39;s characters. </span>
      <span id="f4705"> Your friend Lord Henry Wotton can&#39;t have taught you much about psychology, whatever else he has taught you. </span>
      <span id="f4706"> Nothing will induce me to stir a step to help you. </span>
      <span id="f4707">You have come to the wrong man. </span>
      <span id="f4708"> Go to some of your friends. </span>
      <span id="f4709"> Don&#39;t come to me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4710">&#34;Alan, it was murder. </span>
      <span id="f4711"> I killed him. </span>
      <span id="f4712"> You don&#39;t know what he had made me suffer. </span>
      <span id="f4713"> Whatever my life is, he had more to do with the making or the marring of it than poor Harry has had. </span>
      <span id="f4714"> He may not have intended it, the result was the same.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4715">&#34;Murder! </span>
      <span id="f4716"> Good God, Dorian, is that what you have come to? </span>
      <span id="f4717"> I shall not inform upon you. </span>
      <span id="f4718"> It is not my business. </span>
      <span id="f4719"> Besides, without my stirring in the matter, you are certain to be arrested. </span>
      <span id="f4720"> Nobody ever commits a crime without doing something stupid. </span>
      <span id="f4721"> But I will have nothing to do with it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4722">&#34;You must have something to do with it. </span>
      <span id="f4723"> Wait, wait a moment; listen to me. </span>
      <span id="f4724"> Only listen, Alan. </span>
      <span id="f4725"> All I ask of you is to perform a certain scientific experiment. </span>
      <span id="f4726"> You go to hospitals and dead-houses, and the horrors that you do there don&#39;t affect you. </span>
      <span id="f4727"> If in some hideous dissecting-room or fetid laboratory you found this man lying on a leaden table with red gutters scooped out in it for the blood to flow through, you would simply look upon him as an admirable subject. </span>
      <span id="f4728"> You would not turn a hair. </span>
      <span id="f4729"> You would not believe that you were doing anything wrong. </span>
      <span id="f4730"> On the contrary, you would probably feel that you were benefiting the human race, or increasing the sum of knowledge in the world, or gratifying intellectual curiosity, or something of that kind. </span>
      <span id="f4731">What I want you to do is merely what you have often done before. </span>
      <span id="f4732">Indeed, to destroy a body must be far less horrible than what you are accustomed to work at. </span>
      <span id="f4733"> And, remember, it is the only piece of evidence against me. </span>
      <span id="f4734"> If it is discovered, I am lost; and it is sure to be discovered unless you help me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4735">&#34;I have no desire to help you. </span>
      <span id="f4736"> You forget that. </span>
      <span id="f4737"> I am simply indifferent to the whole thing. </span>
      <span id="f4738"> It has nothing to do with me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4739">&#34;Alan, I entreat you. </span>
      <span id="f4740"> Think of the position I am in. </span>
      <span id="f4741"> Just before you came I almost fainted with terror. </span>
      <span id="f4742"> You may know terror yourself some day. </span>
      <span id="f4743"> No! </span>
      <span id="f4744">don&#39;t think of that. </span>
      <span id="f4745"> Look at the matter purely from the scientific point of view. </span>
      <span id="f4746"> You don&#39;t inquire where the dead things on which you experiment come from. </span>
      <span id="f4747"> Don&#39;t inquire now. </span>
      <span id="f4748"> I have told you too much as it is. </span>
      <span id="f4749"> But I beg of you to do this. </span>
      <span id="f4750"> We were friends once, Alan.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4751">&#34;Don&#39;t speak about those days, Dorian--they are dead.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4752">&#34;The dead linger sometimes. </span>
      <span id="f4753"> The man upstairs will not go away. </span>
      <span id="f4754"> He is sitting at the table with bowed head and outstretched arms. </span>
      <span id="f4755"> Alan! </span>
      <span id="f4756">Alan! </span>
      <span id="f4757"> If you don&#39;t come to my assistance, I am ruined. </span>
      <span id="f4758"> Why, they will hang me, Alan! </span>
      <span id="f4759"> Don&#39;t you understand? </span>
      <span id="f4760"> They will hang me for what I have done.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4761">&#34;There is no good in prolonging this scene. </span>
      <span id="f4762"> I absolutely refuse to do anything in the matter. </span>
      <span id="f4763"> It is insane of you to ask me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4764">&#34;You refuse?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4765">&#34;Yes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4766">&#34;I entreat you, Alan.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4767">&#34;It is useless.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4768">The same look of pity came into Dorian Gray&#39;s eyes. </span>
      <span id="f4769"> Then he stretched out his hand, took a piece of paper, and wrote something on it. </span>
      <span id="f4770"> He read it over twice, folded it carefully, and pushed it across the table. </span>
      <span id="f4771"> Having done this, he got up and went over to the window.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4772">Campbell looked at him in surprise, and then took up the paper, and opened it. </span>
      <span id="f4773"> As he read it, his face became ghastly pale and he fell back in his chair. </span>
      <span id="f4774"> A horrible sense of sickness came over him. </span>
      <span id="f4775"> He felt as if his heart was beating itself to death in some empty hollow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4776">After two or three minutes of terrible silence, Dorian turned round and came and stood behind him, putting his hand upon his shoulder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4777">&#34;I am so sorry for you, Alan,&#34; he murmured, &#34;but you leave me no alternative. </span>
      <span id="f4778"> I have a letter written already. </span>
      <span id="f4779"> Here it is. </span>
      <span id="f4780"> You see the address. </span>
      <span id="f4781"> If you don&#39;t help me, I must send it. </span>
      <span id="f4782"> If you don&#39;t help me, I will send it. </span>
      <span id="f4783"> You know what the result will be. </span>
      <span id="f4784"> But you are going to help me. </span>
      <span id="f4785"> It is impossible for you to refuse now. </span>
      <span id="f4786"> I tried to spare you. </span>
      <span id="f4787"> You will do me the justice to admit that. </span>
      <span id="f4788"> You were stern, harsh, offensive. </span>
      <span id="f4789"> You treated me as no man has ever dared to treat me--no living man, at any rate. </span>
      <span id="f4790"> I bore it all. </span>
      <span id="f4791"> Now it is for me to dictate terms.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4792">Campbell buried his face in his hands, and a shudder passed through him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4793">&#34;Yes, it is my turn to dictate terms, Alan. </span>
      <span id="f4794"> You know what they are. </span>
      <span id="f4795">The thing is quite simple. </span>
      <span id="f4796"> Come, don&#39;t work yourself into this fever. </span>
      <span id="f4797">The thing has to be done. </span>
      <span id="f4798"> Face it, and do it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4799">A groan broke from Campbell&#39;s lips and he shivered all over. </span>
      <span id="f4800"> The ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed to him to be dividing time into separate atoms of agony, each of which was too terrible to be borne. </span>
      <span id="f4801"> He felt as if an iron ring was being slowly tightened round his forehead, as if the disgrace with which he was threatened had already come upon him. </span>
      <span id="f4802"> The hand upon his shoulder weighed like a hand of lead. </span>
      <span id="f4803">It was intolerable. </span>
      <span id="f4804"> It seemed to crush him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4805">&#34;Come, Alan, you must decide at once.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4806">&#34;I cannot do it,&#34; he said, mechanically, as though words could alter things.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4807">&#34;You must. </span>
      <span id="f4808"> You have no choice. </span>
      <span id="f4809"> Don&#39;t delay.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4810">He hesitated a moment. </span>
      <span id="f4811"> &#34;Is there a fire in the room upstairs?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4812">&#34;Yes, there is a gas-fire with asbestos.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4813">&#34;I shall have to go home and get some things from the laboratory.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4814">&#34;No, Alan, you must not leave the house. </span>
      <span id="f4815"> Write out on a sheet of notepaper what you want and my servant will take a cab and bring the things back to you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4816">Campbell scrawled a few lines, blotted them, and addressed an envelope to his assistant. </span>
      <span id="f4817"> Dorian took the note up and read it carefully. </span>
      <span id="f4818"> Then he rang the bell and gave it to his valet, with orders to return as soon as possible and to bring the things with him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4819">As the hall door shut, Campbell started nervously, and having got up from the chair, went over to the chimney-piece. </span>
      <span id="f4820">He was shivering with a kind of ague. </span>
      <span id="f4821"> For nearly twenty minutes, neither of the men spoke. </span>
      <span id="f4822"> A fly buzzed noisily about the room, and the ticking of the clock was like the beat of a hammer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4823">As the chime struck one, Campbell turned round, and looking at Dorian Gray, saw that his eyes were filled with tears. </span>
      <span id="f4824"> There was something in the purity and refinement of that sad face that seemed to enrage him. </span>
      <span id="f4825">&#34;You are infamous, absolutely infamous!&#34; he muttered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4826">&#34;Hush, Alan. </span>
      <span id="f4827"> You have saved my life,&#34; said Dorian.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4828">&#34;Your life? </span>
      <span id="f4829"> Good heavens! </span>
      <span id="f4830">what a life that is! </span>
      <span id="f4831"> You have gone from corruption to corruption, and now you have culminated in crime. </span>
      <span id="f4832"> In doing what I am going to do--what you force me to do--it is not of your life that I am thinking.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4833">&#34;Ah, Alan,&#34; murmured Dorian with a sigh, &#34;I wish you had a thousandth part of the pity for me that I have for you.&#34; He turned away as he spoke and stood looking out at the garden. </span>
      <span id="f4834"> Campbell made no answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4835">After about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the servant entered, carrying a large mahogany chest of chemicals, with a long coil of steel and platinum wire and two rather curiously shaped iron clamps.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4836">&#34;Shall I leave the things here, sir?&#34; he asked Campbell.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4837">&#34;Yes,&#34; said Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f4838"> &#34;And I am afraid, Francis, that I have another errand for you. </span>
      <span id="f4839"> What is the name of the man at Richmond who supplies Selby with orchids?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4840">&#34;Harden, sir.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4841">&#34;Yes--Harden. </span>
      <span id="f4842"> You must go down to Richmond at once, see Harden personally, and tell him to send twice as many orchids as I ordered, and to have as few white ones as possible. </span>
      <span id="f4843"> In fact, I don&#39;t want any white ones. </span>
      <span id="f4844"> It is a lovely day, Francis, and Richmond is a very pretty place--otherwise I wouldn&#39;t bother you about it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4845">&#34;No trouble, sir. </span>
      <span id="f4846"> At what time shall I be back?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4847">Dorian looked at Campbell. </span>
      <span id="f4848"> &#34;How long will your experiment take, Alan?&#34; he said in a calm indifferent voice. </span>
      <span id="f4849"> The presence of a third person in the room seemed to give him extraordinary courage.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4850">Campbell frowned and bit his lip. </span>
      <span id="f4851"> &#34;It will take about five hours,&#34; he answered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4852">&#34;It will be time enough, then, if you are back at half-past seven, Francis. </span>
      <span id="f4853"> Or stay:  just leave my things out for dressing. </span>
      <span id="f4854"> You can have the evening to yourself. </span>
      <span id="f4855"> I am not dining at home, so I shall not want you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4856">&#34;Thank you, sir,&#34; said the man, leaving the room.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4857">&#34;Now, Alan, there is not a moment to be lost. </span>
      <span id="f4858"> How heavy this chest is! </span>
      <span id="f4859">I&#39;ll take it for you. </span>
      <span id="f4860"> You bring the other things.&#34;  He spoke rapidly and in an authoritative manner. </span>
      <span id="f4861"> Campbell felt dominated by him. </span>
      <span id="f4862"> They left the room together.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4863">When they reached the top landing, Dorian took out the key and turned it in the lock. </span>
      <span id="f4864"> Then he stopped, and a troubled look came into his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f4865"> He shuddered. </span>
      <span id="f4866"> &#34;I don&#39;t think I can go in, Alan,&#34; he murmured.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4867">&#34;It is nothing to me. </span>
      <span id="f4868"> I don&#39;t require you,&#34; said Campbell coldly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4869">Dorian half opened the door. </span>
      <span id="f4870"> As he did so, he saw the face of his portrait leering in the sunlight. </span>
      <span id="f4871"> On the floor in front of it the torn curtain was lying. </span>
      <span id="f4872"> He remembered that the night before he had forgotten, for the first time in his life, to hide the fatal canvas, and was about to rush forward, when he drew back with a shudder.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4873">What was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet and glistening, on one of the hands, as though the canvas had sweated blood? </span>
      <span id="f4874"> How horrible it was!--more horrible, it seemed to him for the moment, than the silent thing that he knew was stretched across the table, the thing whose grotesque misshapen shadow on the spotted carpet showed him that it had not stirred, but was still there, as he had left it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4875">He heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little wider, and with half-closed eyes and averted head, walked quickly in, determined that he would not look even once upon the dead man. </span>
      <span id="f4876"> Then, stooping down and taking up the gold-and-purple hanging, he flung it right over the picture.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4877">There he stopped, feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes fixed themselves on the intricacies of the pattern before him. </span>
      <span id="f4878"> He heard Campbell bringing in the heavy chest, and the irons, and the other things that he had required for his dreadful work. </span>
      <span id="f4879"> He began to wonder if he and Basil Hallward had ever met, and, if so, what they had thought of each other.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4880">&#34;Leave me now,&#34; said a stern voice behind him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4881">He turned and hurried out, just conscious that the dead man had been thrust back into the chair and that Campbell was gazing into a glistening yellow face. </span>
      <span id="f4882"> As he was going downstairs, he heard the key being turned in the lock.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4883">It was long after seven when Campbell came back into the library. </span>
      <span id="f4884"> He was pale, but absolutely calm. </span>
      <span id="f4885"> &#34;I have done what you asked me to do,&#34; he muttered. </span>
      <span id="f4886">&#34;And now, good-bye. </span>
      <span id="f4887">Let us never see each other again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4888">&#34;You have saved me from ruin, Alan. </span>
      <span id="f4889"> I cannot forget that,&#34; said Dorian simply.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4890">As soon as Campbell had left, he went upstairs. </span>
      <span id="f4891"> There was a horrible smell of nitric acid in the room. </span>
      <span id="f4892"> But the thing that had been sitting at the table was gone.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>