<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f4893">CHAPTER 15</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f4894">That evening, at eight-thirty, exquisitely dressed and wearing a large button-hole of Parma violets, Dorian Gray was ushered into Lady Narborough&#39;s drawing-room by bowing servants. </span>
      <span id="f4895"> His forehead was throbbing with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited, but his manner as he bent over his hostess&#39;s hand was as easy and graceful as ever. </span>
      <span id="f4896"> Perhaps one never seems so much at one&#39;s ease as when one has to play a part. </span>
      <span id="f4897"> Certainly no one looking at Dorian Gray that night could have believed that he had passed through a tragedy as horrible as any tragedy of our age. </span>
      <span id="f4898"> Those finely shaped fingers could never have clutched a knife for sin, nor those smiling lips have cried out on God and goodness. </span>
      <span id="f4899"> He himself could not help wondering at the calm of his demeanour, and for a moment felt keenly the terrible pleasure of a double life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4900">It was a small party, got up rather in a hurry by Lady Narborough, who was a very clever woman with what Lord Henry used to describe as the remains of really remarkable ugliness. </span>
      <span id="f4901"> She had proved an excellent wife to one of our most tedious ambassadors, and having buried her husband properly in a marble mausoleum, which she had herself designed, and married off her daughters to some rich, rather elderly men, she devoted herself now to the pleasures of French fiction, French cookery, and French _esprit_ when she could get it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4902">Dorian was one of her especial favourites, and she always told him that she was extremely glad she had not met him in early life. </span>
      <span id="f4903"> &#34;I know, my dear, I should have fallen madly in love with you,&#34; she used to say, &#34;and thrown my bonnet right over the mills for your sake. </span>
      <span id="f4904"> It is most fortunate that you were not thought of at the time. </span>
      <span id="f4905"> As it was, our bonnets were so unbecoming, and the mills were so occupied in trying to raise the wind, that I never had even a flirtation with anybody. </span>
      <span id="f4906">However, that was all Narborough&#39;s fault. </span>
      <span id="f4907"> He was dreadfully short-sighted, and there is no pleasure in taking in a husband who never sees anything.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4908">Her guests this evening were rather tedious. </span>
      <span id="f4909"> The fact was, as she explained to Dorian, behind a very shabby fan, one of her married daughters had come up quite suddenly to stay with her, and, to make matters worse, had actually brought her husband with her. </span>
      <span id="f4910"> &#34;I think it is most unkind of her, my dear,&#34; she whispered. </span>
      <span id="f4911"> &#34;Of course I go and stay with them every summer after I come from Homburg, but then an old woman like me must have fresh air sometimes, and besides, I really wake them up. </span>
      <span id="f4912"> You don&#39;t know what an existence they lead down there. </span>
      <span id="f4913"> It is pure unadulterated country life. </span>
      <span id="f4914"> They get up early, because they have so much to do, and go to bed early, because they have so little to think about. </span>
      <span id="f4915"> There has not been a scandal in the neighbourhood since the time of Queen Elizabeth, and consequently they all fall asleep after dinner. </span>
      <span id="f4916"> You shan&#39;t sit next either of them. </span>
      <span id="f4917"> You shall sit by me and amuse me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4918">Dorian murmured a graceful compliment and looked round the room. </span>
      <span id="f4919"> Yes: it was certainly a tedious party. </span>
      <span id="f4920"> Two of the people he had never seen before, and the others consisted of Ernest Harrowden, one of those middle-aged mediocrities so common in London clubs who have no enemies, but are thoroughly disliked by their friends; Lady Ruxton, an overdressed woman of forty-seven, with a hooked nose, who was always trying to get herself compromised, but was so peculiarly plain that to her great disappointment no one would ever believe anything against her; Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f4921">Erlynne, a pushing nobody, with a delightful lisp and Venetian-red hair; Lady Alice Chapman, his hostess&#39;s daughter, a dowdy dull girl, with one of those characteristic British faces that, once seen, are never remembered; and her husband, a red-cheeked, white-whiskered creature who, like so many of his class, was under the impression that inordinate joviality can atone for an entire lack of ideas.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4922">He was rather sorry he had come, till Lady Narborough, looking at the great ormolu gilt clock that sprawled in gaudy curves on the mauve-draped mantelshelf, exclaimed:  &#34;How horrid of Henry Wotton to be so late! </span>
      <span id="f4923"> I sent round to him this morning on chance and he promised faithfully not to disappoint me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4924">It was some consolation that Harry was to be there, and when the door opened and he heard his slow musical voice lending charm to some insincere apology, he ceased to feel bored.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4925">But at dinner he could not eat anything. </span>
      <span id="f4926"> Plate after plate went away untasted. </span>
      <span id="f4927"> Lady Narborough kept scolding him for what she called &#34;an insult to poor Adolphe, who invented the _menu_ specially for you,&#34; and now and then Lord Henry looked across at him, wondering at his silence and abstracted manner. </span>
      <span id="f4928"> From time to time the butler filled his glass with champagne. </span>
      <span id="f4929"> He drank eagerly, and his thirst seemed to increase.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4930">&#34;Dorian,&#34; said Lord Henry at last, as the _chaud-froid_ was being handed round, &#34;what is the matter with you to-night? </span>
      <span id="f4931">You are quite out of sorts.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4932">&#34;I believe he is in love,&#34; cried Lady Narborough, &#34;and that he is afraid to tell me for fear I should be jealous. </span>
      <span id="f4933"> He is quite right. </span>
      <span id="f4934"> I certainly should.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4935">&#34;Dear Lady Narborough,&#34; murmured Dorian, smiling, &#34;I have not been in love for a whole week--not, in fact, since Madame de Ferrol left town.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4936">&#34;How you men can fall in love with that woman!&#34; exclaimed the old lady. </span>
      <span id="f4937">&#34;I really cannot understand it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4938">&#34;It is simply because she remembers you when you were a little girl, Lady Narborough,&#34; said Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f4939"> &#34;She is the one link between us and your short frocks.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4940">&#34;She does not remember my short frocks at all, Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f4941"> But I remember her very well at Vienna thirty years ago, and how _decolletee_ she was then.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4942">&#34;She is still _decolletee_,&#34; he answered, taking an olive in his long fingers; &#34;and when she is in a very smart gown she looks like an _edition de luxe_ of a bad French novel. </span>
      <span id="f4943"> She is really wonderful, and full of surprises. </span>
      <span id="f4944"> Her capacity for family affection is extraordinary. </span>
      <span id="f4945">When her third husband died, her hair turned quite gold from grief.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4946">&#34;How can you, Harry!&#34; cried Dorian.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4947">&#34;It is a most romantic explanation,&#34; laughed the hostess. </span>
      <span id="f4948"> &#34;But her third husband, Lord Henry! </span>
      <span id="f4949"> You don&#39;t mean to say Ferrol is the fourth?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4950">&#34;Certainly, Lady Narborough.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4951">&#34;I don&#39;t believe a word of it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4952">&#34;Well, ask Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4953">Gray. </span>
      <span id="f4954"> He is one of her most intimate friends.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4955">&#34;Is it true, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f4956">Gray?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4957">&#34;She assures me so, Lady Narborough,&#34; said Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f4958"> &#34;I asked her whether, like Marguerite de Navarre, she had their hearts embalmed and hung at her girdle. </span>
      <span id="f4959"> She told me she didn&#39;t, because none of them had had any hearts at all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4960">&#34;Four husbands! </span>
      <span id="f4961"> Upon my word that is _trop de zele_.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4962">&#34;_Trop d&#39;audace_, I tell her,&#34; said Dorian.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4963">&#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f4964">she is audacious enough for anything, my dear. </span>
      <span id="f4965"> And what is Ferrol like? </span>
      <span id="f4966"> I don&#39;t know him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4967">&#34;The husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminal classes,&#34; said Lord Henry, sipping his wine.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4968">Lady Narborough hit him with her fan. </span>
      <span id="f4969"> &#34;Lord Henry, I am not at all surprised that the world says that you are extremely wicked.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4970">&#34;But what world says that?&#34; asked Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows. </span>
      <span id="f4971">&#34;It can only be the next world. </span>
      <span id="f4972"> This world and I are on excellent terms.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4973">&#34;Everybody I know says you are very wicked,&#34; cried the old lady, shaking her head.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4974">Lord Henry looked serious for some moments. </span>
      <span id="f4975"> &#34;It is perfectly monstrous,&#34; he said, at last, &#34;the way people go about nowadays saying things against one behind one&#39;s back that are absolutely and entirely true.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4976">&#34;Isn&#39;t he incorrigible?&#34; cried Dorian, leaning forward in his chair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4977">&#34;I hope so,&#34; said his hostess, laughing. </span>
      <span id="f4978"> &#34;But really, if you all worship Madame de Ferrol in this ridiculous way, I shall have to marry again so as to be in the fashion.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4979">&#34;You will never marry again, Lady Narborough,&#34; broke in Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f4980">&#34;You were far too happy. </span>
      <span id="f4981"> When a woman marries again, it is because she detested her first husband. </span>
      <span id="f4982"> When a man marries again, it is because he adored his first wife. </span>
      <span id="f4983"> Women try their luck; men risk theirs.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4984">&#34;Narborough wasn&#39;t perfect,&#34; cried the old lady.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4985">&#34;If he had been, you would not have loved him, my dear lady,&#34; was the rejoinder. </span>
      <span id="f4986"> &#34;Women love us for our defects. </span>
      <span id="f4987"> If we have enough of them, they will forgive us everything, even our intellects. </span>
      <span id="f4988"> You will never ask me to dinner again after saying this, I am afraid, Lady Narborough, but it is quite true.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4989">&#34;Of course it is true, Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f4990"> If we women did not love you for your defects, where would you all be? </span>
      <span id="f4991"> Not one of you would ever be married. </span>
      <span id="f4992"> You would be a set of unfortunate bachelors. </span>
      <span id="f4993"> Not, however, that that would alter you much. </span>
      <span id="f4994"> Nowadays all the married men live like bachelors, and all the bachelors like married men.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4995">&#34;_Fin de siecle_,&#34; murmured Lord Henry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4996">&#34;_Fin du globe_,&#34; answered his hostess.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4997">&#34;I wish it were _fin du globe_,&#34; said Dorian with a sigh. </span>
      <span id="f4998"> &#34;Life is a great disappointment.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f4999">&#34;Ah, my dear,&#34; cried Lady Narborough, putting on her gloves, &#34;don&#39;t tell me that you have exhausted life. </span>
      <span id="f5000"> When a man says that one knows that life has exhausted him. </span>
      <span id="f5001"> Lord Henry is very wicked, and I sometimes wish that I had been; but you are made to be good--you look so good. </span>
      <span id="f5002"> I must find you a nice wife. </span>
      <span id="f5003"> Lord Henry, don&#39;t you think that Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5004">Gray should get married?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5005">&#34;I am always telling him so, Lady Narborough,&#34; said Lord Henry with a bow.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5006">&#34;Well, we must look out for a suitable match for him. </span>
      <span id="f5007"> I shall go through Debrett carefully to-night and draw out a list of all the eligible young ladies.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5008">&#34;With their ages, Lady Narborough?&#34; asked Dorian.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5009">&#34;Of course, with their ages, slightly edited. </span>
      <span id="f5010"> But nothing must be done in a hurry. </span>
      <span id="f5011"> I want it to be what _The Morning Post_ calls a suitable alliance, and I want you both to be happy.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5012">&#34;What nonsense people talk about happy marriages!&#34; exclaimed Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f5013"> &#34;A man can be happy with any woman, as long as he does not love her.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5014">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f5015">what a cynic you are!&#34; cried the old lady, pushing back her chair and nodding to Lady Ruxton. </span>
      <span id="f5016"> &#34;You must come and dine with me soon again. </span>
      <span id="f5017"> You are really an admirable tonic, much better than what Sir Andrew prescribes for me. </span>
      <span id="f5018"> You must tell me what people you would like to meet, though. </span>
      <span id="f5019"> I want it to be a delightful gathering.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5020">&#34;I like men who have a future and women who have a past,&#34; he answered. </span>
      <span id="f5021">&#34;Or do you think that would make it a petticoat party?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5022">&#34;I fear so,&#34; she said, laughing, as she stood up. </span>
      <span id="f5023"> &#34;A thousand pardons, my dear Lady Ruxton,&#34; she added, &#34;I didn&#39;t see you hadn&#39;t finished your cigarette.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5024">&#34;Never mind, Lady Narborough. </span>
      <span id="f5025"> I smoke a great deal too much. </span>
      <span id="f5026"> I am going to limit myself, for the future.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5027">&#34;Pray don&#39;t, Lady Ruxton,&#34; said Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f5028"> &#34;Moderation is a fatal thing. </span>
      <span id="f5029"> Enough is as bad as a meal. </span>
      <span id="f5030"> More than enough is as good as a feast.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5031">Lady Ruxton glanced at him curiously. </span>
      <span id="f5032"> &#34;You must come and explain that to me some afternoon, Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f5033"> It sounds a fascinating theory,&#34; she murmured, as she swept out of the room.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5034">&#34;Now, mind you don&#39;t stay too long over your politics and scandal,&#34; cried Lady Narborough from the door. </span>
      <span id="f5035"> &#34;If you do, we are sure to squabble upstairs.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5036">The men laughed, and Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5037">Chapman got up solemnly from the foot of the table and came up to the top. </span>
      <span id="f5038"> Dorian Gray changed his seat and went and sat by Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f5039"> Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5040">Chapman began to talk in a loud voice about the situation in the House of Commons. </span>
      <span id="f5041"> He guffawed at his adversaries. </span>
      <span id="f5042">The word _doctrinaire_--word full of terror to the British mind--reappeared from time to time between his explosions. </span>
      <span id="f5043"> An alliterative prefix served as an ornament of oratory. </span>
      <span id="f5044"> He hoisted the Union Jack on the pinnacles of thought. </span>
      <span id="f5045"> The inherited stupidity of the race--sound English common sense he jovially termed it--was shown to be the proper bulwark for society.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5046">A smile curved Lord Henry&#39;s lips, and he turned round and looked at Dorian.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5047">&#34;Are you better, my dear fellow?&#34; he asked. </span>
      <span id="f5048"> &#34;You seemed rather out of sorts at dinner.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5049">&#34;I am quite well, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f5050"> I am tired. </span>
      <span id="f5051"> That is all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5052">&#34;You were charming last night. </span>
      <span id="f5053"> The little duchess is quite devoted to you. </span>
      <span id="f5054"> She tells me she is going down to Selby.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5055">&#34;She has promised to come on the twentieth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5056">&#34;Is Monmouth to be there, too?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5057">&#34;Oh, yes, Harry.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5058">&#34;He bores me dreadfully, almost as much as he bores her. </span>
      <span id="f5059"> She is very clever, too clever for a woman. </span>
      <span id="f5060"> She lacks the indefinable charm of weakness. </span>
      <span id="f5061"> It is the feet of clay that make the gold of the image precious. </span>
      <span id="f5062"> Her feet are very pretty, but they are not feet of clay. </span>
      <span id="f5063">White porcelain feet, if you like. </span>
      <span id="f5064"> They have been through the fire, and what fire does not destroy, it hardens. </span>
      <span id="f5065"> She has had experiences.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5066">&#34;How long has she been married?&#34; asked Dorian.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5067">&#34;An eternity, she tells me. </span>
      <span id="f5068"> I believe, according to the peerage, it is ten years, but ten years with Monmouth must have been like eternity, with time thrown in. </span>
      <span id="f5069"> Who else is coming?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5070">&#34;Oh, the Willoughbys, Lord Rugby and his wife, our hostess, Geoffrey Clouston, the usual set. </span>
      <span id="f5071"> I have asked Lord Grotrian.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5072">&#34;I like him,&#34; said Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f5073"> &#34;A great many people don&#39;t, but I find him charming. </span>
      <span id="f5074"> He atones for being occasionally somewhat overdressed by being always absolutely over-educated. </span>
      <span id="f5075">He is a very modern type.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5076">&#34;I don&#39;t know if he will be able to come, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f5077"> He may have to go to Monte Carlo with his father.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5078">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f5079">what a nuisance people&#39;s people are! </span>
      <span id="f5080"> Try and make him come. </span>
      <span id="f5081"> By the way, Dorian, you ran off very early last night. </span>
      <span id="f5082"> You left before eleven. </span>
      <span id="f5083"> What did you do afterwards? </span>
      <span id="f5084"> Did you go straight home?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5085">Dorian glanced at him hurriedly and frowned.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5086">&#34;No, Harry,&#34; he said at last, &#34;I did not get home till nearly three.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5087">&#34;Did you go to the club?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5088">&#34;Yes,&#34; he answered. </span>
      <span id="f5089"> Then he bit his lip. </span>
      <span id="f5090"> &#34;No, I don&#39;t mean that. </span>
      <span id="f5091"> I didn&#39;t go to the club. </span>
      <span id="f5092"> I walked about. </span>
      <span id="f5093"> I forget what I did.... </span>
      <span id="f5094">How inquisitive you are, Harry! </span>
      <span id="f5095"> You always want to know what one has been doing. </span>
      <span id="f5096"> I always want to forget what I have been doing. </span>
      <span id="f5097"> I came in at half-past two, if you wish to know the exact time. </span>
      <span id="f5098"> I had left my latch-key at home, and my servant had to let me in. </span>
      <span id="f5099"> If you want any corroborative evidence on the subject, you can ask him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5100">Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f5101"> &#34;My dear fellow, as if I cared! </span>
      <span id="f5102">Let us go up to the drawing-room. </span>
      <span id="f5103">No sherry, thank you, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5104">Chapman. </span>
      <span id="f5105">Something has happened to you, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f5106"> Tell me what it is. </span>
      <span id="f5107"> You are not yourself to-night.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5108">&#34;Don&#39;t mind me, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f5109"> I am irritable, and out of temper. </span>
      <span id="f5110"> I shall come round and see you to-morrow, or next day. </span>
      <span id="f5111"> Make my excuses to Lady Narborough. </span>
      <span id="f5112"> I shan&#39;t go upstairs. </span>
      <span id="f5113"> I shall go home. </span>
      <span id="f5114"> I must go home.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5115">&#34;All right, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f5116"> I dare say I shall see you to-morrow at tea-time. </span>
      <span id="f5117">The duchess is coming.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5118">&#34;I will try to be there, Harry,&#34; he said, leaving the room. </span>
      <span id="f5119"> As he drove back to his own house, he was conscious that the sense of terror he thought he had strangled had come back to him. </span>
      <span id="f5120"> Lord Henry&#39;s casual questioning had made him lose his nerve for the moment, and he wanted his nerve still. </span>
      <span id="f5121"> Things that were dangerous had to be destroyed. </span>
      <span id="f5122"> He winced. </span>
      <span id="f5123"> He hated the idea of even touching them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5124">Yet it had to be done. </span>
      <span id="f5125"> He realized that, and when he had locked the door of his library, he opened the secret press into which he had thrust Basil Hallward&#39;s coat and bag. </span>
      <span id="f5126"> A huge fire was blazing. </span>
      <span id="f5127"> He piled another log on it. </span>
      <span id="f5128"> The smell of the singeing clothes and burning leather was horrible. </span>
      <span id="f5129"> It took him three-quarters of an hour to consume everything. </span>
      <span id="f5130"> At the end he felt faint and sick, and having lit some Algerian pastilles in a pierced copper brazier, he bathed his hands and forehead with a cool musk-scented vinegar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5131">Suddenly he started. </span>
      <span id="f5132"> His eyes grew strangely bright, and he gnawed nervously at his underlip. </span>
      <span id="f5133"> Between two of the windows stood a large Florentine cabinet, made out of ebony and inlaid with ivory and blue lapis. </span>
      <span id="f5134"> He watched it as though it were a thing that could fascinate and make afraid, as though it held something that he longed for and yet almost loathed. </span>
      <span id="f5135"> His breath quickened. </span>
      <span id="f5136"> A mad craving came over him. </span>
      <span id="f5137">He lit a cigarette and then threw it away. </span>
      <span id="f5138"> His eyelids drooped till the long fringed lashes almost touched his cheek. </span>
      <span id="f5139"> But he still watched the cabinet. </span>
      <span id="f5140"> At last he got up from the sofa on which he had been lying, went over to it, and having unlocked it, touched some hidden spring. </span>
      <span id="f5141"> A triangular drawer passed slowly out. </span>
      <span id="f5142"> His fingers moved instinctively towards it, dipped in, and closed on something. </span>
      <span id="f5143"> It was a small Chinese box of black and gold-dust lacquer, elaborately wrought, the sides patterned with curved waves, and the silken cords hung with round crystals and tasselled in plaited metal threads. </span>
      <span id="f5144"> He opened it. </span>
      <span id="f5145">Inside was a green paste, waxy in lustre, the odour curiously heavy and persistent.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5146">He hesitated for some moments, with a strangely immobile smile upon his face. </span>
      <span id="f5147"> Then shivering, though the atmosphere of the room was terribly hot, he drew himself up and glanced at the clock. </span>
      <span id="f5148"> It was twenty minutes to twelve. </span>
      <span id="f5149"> He put the box back, shutting the cabinet doors as he did so, and went into his bedroom.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5150">As midnight was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air, Dorian Gray, dressed commonly, and with a muffler wrapped round his throat, crept quietly out of his house. </span>
      <span id="f5151"> In Bond Street he found a hansom with a good horse. </span>
      <span id="f5152"> He hailed it and in a low voice gave the driver an address.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5153">The man shook his head. </span>
      <span id="f5154"> &#34;It is too far for me,&#34; he muttered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5155">&#34;Here is a sovereign for you,&#34; said Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f5156"> &#34;You shall have another if you drive fast.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5157">&#34;All right, sir,&#34; answered the man, &#34;you will be there in an hour,&#34; and after his fare had got in he turned his horse round and drove rapidly towards the river.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>