<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f5158">CHAPTER 16</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f5159">A cold rain began to fall, and the blurred street-lamps looked ghastly in the dripping mist. </span>
      <span id="f5160"> The public-houses were just closing, and dim men and women were clustering in broken groups round their doors. </span>
      <span id="f5161"> From some of the bars came the sound of horrible laughter. </span>
      <span id="f5162"> In others, drunkards brawled and screamed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5163">Lying back in the hansom, with his hat pulled over his forehead, Dorian Gray watched with listless eyes the sordid shame of the great city, and now and then he repeated to himself the words that Lord Henry had said to him on the first day they had met, &#34;To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul.&#34;  Yes, that was the secret. </span>
      <span id="f5164"> He had often tried it, and would try it again now. </span>
      <span id="f5165"> There were opium dens where one could buy oblivion, dens of horror where the memory of old sins could be destroyed by the madness of sins that were new.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5166">The moon hung low in the sky like a yellow skull. </span>
      <span id="f5167"> From time to time a huge misshapen cloud stretched a long arm across and hid it. </span>
      <span id="f5168"> The gas-lamps grew fewer, and the streets more narrow and gloomy. </span>
      <span id="f5169"> Once the man lost his way and had to drive back half a mile. </span>
      <span id="f5170"> A steam rose from the horse as it splashed up the puddles. </span>
      <span id="f5171"> The sidewindows of the hansom were clogged with a grey-flannel mist.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5172">&#34;To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul!&#34;  How the words rang in his ears! </span>
      <span id="f5173"> His soul, certainly, was sick to death. </span>
      <span id="f5174"> Was it true that the senses could cure it? </span>
      <span id="f5175"> Innocent blood had been spilled. </span>
      <span id="f5176"> What could atone for that? </span>
      <span id="f5177"> Ah! </span>
      <span id="f5178">for that there was no atonement; but though forgiveness was impossible, forgetfulness was possible still, and he was determined to forget, to stamp the thing out, to crush it as one would crush the adder that had stung one. </span>
      <span id="f5179">Indeed, what right had Basil to have spoken to him as he had done? </span>
      <span id="f5180"> Who had made him a judge over others? </span>
      <span id="f5181"> He had said things that were dreadful, horrible, not to be endured.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5182">On and on plodded the hansom, going slower, it seemed to him, at each step. </span>
      <span id="f5183"> He thrust up the trap and called to the man to drive faster. </span>
      <span id="f5184">The hideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at him. </span>
      <span id="f5185"> His throat burned and his delicate hands twitched nervously together. </span>
      <span id="f5186"> He struck at the horse madly with his stick. </span>
      <span id="f5187"> The driver laughed and whipped up. </span>
      <span id="f5188"> He laughed in answer, and the man was silent.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5189">The way seemed interminable, and the streets like the black web of some sprawling spider. </span>
      <span id="f5190"> The monotony became unbearable, and as the mist thickened, he felt afraid.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5191">Then they passed by lonely brickfields. </span>
      <span id="f5192"> The fog was lighter here, and he could see the strange, bottle-shaped kilns with their orange, fanlike tongues of fire. </span>
      <span id="f5193"> A dog barked as they went by, and far away in the darkness some wandering sea-gull screamed. </span>
      <span id="f5194"> The horse stumbled in a rut, then swerved aside and broke into a gallop.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5195">After some time they left the clay road and rattled again over rough-paven streets. </span>
      <span id="f5196"> Most of the windows were dark, but now and then fantastic shadows were silhouetted against some lamplit blind. </span>
      <span id="f5197"> He watched them curiously. </span>
      <span id="f5198"> They moved like monstrous marionettes and made gestures like live things. </span>
      <span id="f5199"> He hated them. </span>
      <span id="f5200"> A dull rage was in his heart. </span>
      <span id="f5201"> As they turned a corner, a woman yelled something at them from an open door, and two men ran after the hansom for about a hundred yards. </span>
      <span id="f5202"> The driver beat at them with his whip.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5203">It is said that passion makes one think in a circle. </span>
      <span id="f5204"> Certainly with hideous iteration the bitten lips of Dorian Gray shaped and reshaped those subtle words that dealt with soul and sense, till he had found in them the full expression, as it were, of his mood, and justified, by intellectual approval, passions that without such justification would still have dominated his temper. </span>
      <span id="f5205"> From cell to cell of his brain crept the one thought; and the wild desire to live, most terrible of all man&#39;s appetites, quickened into force each trembling nerve and fibre. </span>
      <span id="f5206">Ugliness that had once been hateful to him because it made things real, became dear to him now for that very reason. </span>
      <span id="f5207"> Ugliness was the one reality. </span>
      <span id="f5208"> The coarse brawl, the loathsome den, the crude violence of disordered life, the very vileness of thief and outcast, were more vivid, in their intense actuality of impression, than all the gracious shapes of art, the dreamy shadows of song. </span>
      <span id="f5209"> They were what he needed for forgetfulness. </span>
      <span id="f5210"> In three days he would be free.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5211">Suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top of a dark lane. </span>
      <span id="f5212"> Over the low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the houses rose the black masts of ships. </span>
      <span id="f5213"> Wreaths of white mist clung like ghostly sails to the yards.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5214">&#34;Somewhere about here, sir, ain&#39;t it?&#34; he asked huskily through the trap.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5215">Dorian started and peered round. </span>
      <span id="f5216"> &#34;This will do,&#34; he answered, and having got out hastily and given the driver the extra fare he had promised him, he walked quickly in the direction of the quay. </span>
      <span id="f5217"> Here and there a lantern gleamed at the stern of some huge merchantman. </span>
      <span id="f5218"> The light shook and splintered in the puddles. </span>
      <span id="f5219"> A red glare came from an outward-bound steamer that was coaling. </span>
      <span id="f5220"> The slimy pavement looked like a wet mackintosh.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5221">He hurried on towards the left, glancing back now and then to see if he was being followed. </span>
      <span id="f5222"> In about seven or eight minutes he reached a small shabby house that was wedged in between two gaunt factories. </span>
      <span id="f5223"> In one of the top-windows stood a lamp. </span>
      <span id="f5224"> He stopped and gave a peculiar knock.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5225">After a little time he heard steps in the passage and the chain being unhooked. </span>
      <span id="f5226"> The door opened quietly, and he went in without saying a word to the squat misshapen figure that flattened itself into the shadow as he passed. </span>
      <span id="f5227"> At the end of the hall hung a tattered green curtain that swayed and shook in the gusty wind which had followed him in from the street. </span>
      <span id="f5228"> He dragged it aside and entered a long low room which looked as if it had once been a third-rate dancing-saloon. </span>
      <span id="f5229">Shrill flaring gas-jets, dulled and distorted in the fly-blown mirrors that faced them, were ranged round the walls. </span>
      <span id="f5230"> Greasy reflectors of ribbed tin backed them, making quivering disks of light. </span>
      <span id="f5231"> The floor was covered with ochre-coloured sawdust, trampled here and there into mud, and stained with dark rings of spilled liquor. </span>
      <span id="f5232"> Some Malays were crouching by a little charcoal stove, playing with bone counters and showing their white teeth as they chattered. </span>
      <span id="f5233"> In one corner, with his head buried in his arms, a sailor sprawled over a table, and by the tawdrily painted bar that ran across one complete side stood two haggard women, mocking an old man who was brushing the sleeves of his coat with an expression of disgust. </span>
      <span id="f5234"> &#34;He thinks he&#39;s got red ants on him,&#34; laughed one of them, as Dorian passed by. </span>
      <span id="f5235"> The man looked at her in terror and began to whimper.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5236">At the end of the room there was a little staircase, leading to a darkened chamber. </span>
      <span id="f5237"> As Dorian hurried up its three rickety steps, the heavy odour of opium met him. </span>
      <span id="f5238"> He heaved a deep breath, and his nostrils quivered with pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f5239"> When he entered, a young man with smooth yellow hair, who was bending over a lamp lighting a long thin pipe, looked up at him and nodded in a hesitating manner.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5240">&#34;You here, Adrian?&#34; muttered Dorian.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5241">&#34;Where else should I be?&#34; he answered, listlessly. </span>
      <span id="f5242"> &#34;None of the chaps will speak to me now.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5243">&#34;I thought you had left England.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5244">&#34;Darlington is not going to do anything. </span>
      <span id="f5245"> My brother paid the bill at last. </span>
      <span id="f5246"> George doesn&#39;t speak to me either.... </span>
      <span id="f5247">I don&#39;t care,&#34; he added with a sigh. </span>
      <span id="f5248"> &#34;As long as one has this stuff, one doesn&#39;t want friends. </span>
      <span id="f5249">I think I have had too many friends.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5250">Dorian winced and looked round at the grotesque things that lay in such fantastic postures on the ragged mattresses. </span>
      <span id="f5251"> The twisted limbs, the gaping mouths, the staring lustreless eyes, fascinated him. </span>
      <span id="f5252"> He knew in what strange heavens they were suffering, and what dull hells were teaching them the secret of some new joy. </span>
      <span id="f5253"> They were better off than he was. </span>
      <span id="f5254"> He was prisoned in thought. </span>
      <span id="f5255"> Memory, like a horrible malady, was eating his soul away. </span>
      <span id="f5256"> From time to time he seemed to see the eyes of Basil Hallward looking at him. </span>
      <span id="f5257"> Yet he felt he could not stay. </span>
      <span id="f5258"> The presence of Adrian Singleton troubled him. </span>
      <span id="f5259"> He wanted to be where no one would know who he was. </span>
      <span id="f5260"> He wanted to escape from himself.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5261">&#34;I am going on to the other place,&#34; he said after a pause.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5262">&#34;On the wharf?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5263">&#34;Yes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5264">&#34;That mad-cat is sure to be there. </span>
      <span id="f5265"> They won&#39;t have her in this place now.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5266">Dorian shrugged his shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f5267"> &#34;I am sick of women who love one. </span>
      <span id="f5268">Women who hate one are much more interesting. </span>
      <span id="f5269"> Besides, the stuff is better.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5270">&#34;Much the same.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5271">&#34;I like it better. </span>
      <span id="f5272"> Come and have something to drink. </span>
      <span id="f5273"> I must have something.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5274">&#34;I don&#39;t want anything,&#34; murmured the young man.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5275">&#34;Never mind.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5276">Adrian Singleton rose up wearily and followed Dorian to the bar. </span>
      <span id="f5277"> A half-caste, in a ragged turban and a shabby ulster, grinned a hideous greeting as he thrust a bottle of brandy and two tumblers in front of them. </span>
      <span id="f5278"> The women sidled up and began to chatter. </span>
      <span id="f5279"> Dorian turned his back on them and said something in a low voice to Adrian Singleton.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5280">A crooked smile, like a Malay crease, writhed across the face of one of the women. </span>
      <span id="f5281"> &#34;We are very proud to-night,&#34; she sneered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5282">&#34;For God&#39;s sake don&#39;t talk to me,&#34; cried Dorian, stamping his foot on the ground. </span>
      <span id="f5283"> &#34;What do you want? </span>
      <span id="f5284"> Money? </span>
      <span id="f5285"> Here it is. </span>
      <span id="f5286"> Don&#39;t ever talk to me again.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5287">Two red sparks flashed for a moment in the woman&#39;s sodden eyes, then flickered out and left them dull and glazed. </span>
      <span id="f5288"> She tossed her head and raked the coins off the counter with greedy fingers. </span>
      <span id="f5289"> Her companion watched her enviously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5290">&#34;It&#39;s no use,&#34; sighed Adrian Singleton. </span>
      <span id="f5291"> &#34;I don&#39;t care to go back. </span>
      <span id="f5292">What does it matter? </span>
      <span id="f5293"> I am quite happy here.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5294">&#34;You will write to me if you want anything, won&#39;t you?&#34; said Dorian, after a pause.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5295">&#34;Perhaps.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5296">&#34;Good night, then.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5297">&#34;Good night,&#34; answered the young man, passing up the steps and wiping his parched mouth with a handkerchief.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5298">Dorian walked to the door with a look of pain in his face. </span>
      <span id="f5299"> As he drew the curtain aside, a hideous laugh broke from the painted lips of the woman who had taken his money. </span>
      <span id="f5300"> &#34;There goes the devil&#39;s bargain!&#34; she hiccoughed, in a hoarse voice.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5301">&#34;Curse you!&#34; he answered, &#34;don&#39;t call me that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5302">She snapped her fingers. </span>
      <span id="f5303"> &#34;Prince Charming is what you like to be called, ain&#39;t it?&#34; she yelled after him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5304">The drowsy sailor leaped to his feet as she spoke, and looked wildly round. </span>
      <span id="f5305"> The sound of the shutting of the hall door fell on his ear. </span>
      <span id="f5306"> He rushed out as if in pursuit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5307">Dorian Gray hurried along the quay through the drizzling rain. </span>
      <span id="f5308"> His meeting with Adrian Singleton had strangely moved him, and he wondered if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his door, as Basil Hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult. </span>
      <span id="f5309"> He bit his lip, and for a few seconds his eyes grew sad. </span>
      <span id="f5310"> Yet, after all, what did it matter to him? </span>
      <span id="f5311"> One&#39;s days were too brief to take the burden of another&#39;s errors on one&#39;s shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f5312"> Each man lived his own life and paid his own price for living it. </span>
      <span id="f5313"> The only pity was one had to pay so often for a single fault. </span>
      <span id="f5314"> One had to pay over and over again, indeed. </span>
      <span id="f5315">In her dealings with man, destiny never closed her accounts.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5316">There are moments, psychologists tell us, when the passion for sin, or for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre of the body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with fearful impulses. </span>
      <span id="f5317"> Men and women at such moments lose the freedom of their will. </span>
      <span id="f5318"> They move to their terrible end as automatons move. </span>
      <span id="f5319"> Choice is taken from them, and conscience is either killed, or, if it lives at all, lives but to give rebellion its fascination and disobedience its charm. </span>
      <span id="f5320"> For all sins, as theologians weary not of reminding us, are sins of disobedience. </span>
      <span id="f5321"> When that high spirit, that morning star of evil, fell from heaven, it was as a rebel that he fell.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5322">Callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul hungry for rebellion, Dorian Gray hastened on, quickening his step as he went, but as he darted aside into a dim archway, that had served him often as a short cut to the ill-famed place where he was going, he felt himself suddenly seized from behind, and before he had time to defend himself, he was thrust back against the wall, with a brutal hand round his throat.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5323">He struggled madly for life, and by a terrible effort wrenched the tightening fingers away. </span>
      <span id="f5324"> In a second he heard the click of a revolver, and saw the gleam of a polished barrel, pointing straight at his head, and the dusky form of a short, thick-set man facing him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5325">&#34;What do you want?&#34; he gasped.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5326">&#34;Keep quiet,&#34; said the man. </span>
      <span id="f5327"> &#34;If you stir, I shoot you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5328">&#34;You are mad. </span>
      <span id="f5329"> What have I done to you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5330">&#34;You wrecked the life of Sibyl Vane,&#34; was the answer, &#34;and Sibyl Vane was my sister. </span>
      <span id="f5331"> She killed herself. </span>
      <span id="f5332"> I know it. </span>
      <span id="f5333"> Her death is at your door. </span>
      <span id="f5334"> I swore I would kill you in return. </span>
      <span id="f5335"> For years I have sought you. </span>
      <span id="f5336"> I had no clue, no trace. </span>
      <span id="f5337"> The two people who could have described you were dead. </span>
      <span id="f5338"> I knew nothing of you but the pet name she used to call you. </span>
      <span id="f5339"> I heard it to-night by chance. </span>
      <span id="f5340"> Make your peace with God, for to-night you are going to die.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5341">Dorian Gray grew sick with fear. </span>
      <span id="f5342"> &#34;I never knew her,&#34; he stammered. </span>
      <span id="f5343"> &#34;I never heard of her. </span>
      <span id="f5344"> You are mad.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5345">&#34;You had better confess your sin, for as sure as I am James Vane, you are going to die.&#34;  There was a horrible moment. </span>
      <span id="f5346"> Dorian did not know what to say or do. </span>
      <span id="f5347"> &#34;Down on your knees!&#34; growled the man. </span>
      <span id="f5348"> &#34;I give you one minute to make your peace--no more. </span>
      <span id="f5349"> I go on board to-night for India, and I must do my job first. </span>
      <span id="f5350"> One minute. </span>
      <span id="f5351"> That&#39;s all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5352">Dorian&#39;s arms fell to his side. </span>
      <span id="f5353"> Paralysed with terror, he did not know what to do. </span>
      <span id="f5354"> Suddenly a wild hope flashed across his brain. </span>
      <span id="f5355"> &#34;Stop,&#34; he cried. </span>
      <span id="f5356"> &#34;How long ago is it since your sister died? </span>
      <span id="f5357"> Quick, tell me!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5358">&#34;Eighteen years,&#34; said the man. </span>
      <span id="f5359"> &#34;Why do you ask me? </span>
      <span id="f5360"> What do years matter?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5361">&#34;Eighteen years,&#34; laughed Dorian Gray, with a touch of triumph in his voice. </span>
      <span id="f5362"> &#34;Eighteen years! </span>
      <span id="f5363"> Set me under the lamp and look at my face!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5364">James Vane hesitated for a moment, not understanding what was meant. </span>
      <span id="f5365">Then he seized Dorian Gray and dragged him from the archway.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5366">Dim and wavering as was the wind-blown light, yet it served to show him the hideous error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen, for the face of the man he had sought to kill had all the bloom of boyhood, all the unstained purity of youth. </span>
      <span id="f5367"> He seemed little more than a lad of twenty summers, hardly older, if older indeed at all, than his sister had been when they had parted so many years ago. </span>
      <span id="f5368"> It was obvious that this was not the man who had destroyed her life.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5369">He loosened his hold and reeled back. </span>
      <span id="f5370"> &#34;My God! </span>
      <span id="f5371">my God!&#34; he cried, &#34;and I would have murdered you!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5372">Dorian Gray drew a long breath. </span>
      <span id="f5373"> &#34;You have been on the brink of committing a terrible crime, my man,&#34; he said, looking at him sternly. </span>
      <span id="f5374">&#34;Let this be a warning to you not to take vengeance into your own hands.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5375">&#34;Forgive me, sir,&#34; muttered James Vane. </span>
      <span id="f5376"> &#34;I was deceived. </span>
      <span id="f5377"> A chance word I heard in that damned den set me on the wrong track.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5378">&#34;You had better go home and put that pistol away, or you may get into trouble,&#34; said Dorian, turning on his heel and going slowly down the street.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5379">James Vane stood on the pavement in horror. </span>
      <span id="f5380"> He was trembling from head to foot. </span>
      <span id="f5381"> After a little while, a black shadow that had been creeping along the dripping wall moved out into the light and came close to him with stealthy footsteps. </span>
      <span id="f5382"> He felt a hand laid on his arm and looked round with a start. </span>
      <span id="f5383"> It was one of the women who had been drinking at the bar.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5384">&#34;Why didn&#39;t you kill him?&#34; she hissed out, putting haggard face quite close to his. </span>
      <span id="f5385"> &#34;I knew you were following him when you rushed out from Daly&#39;s. </span>
      <span id="f5386">You fool! </span>
      <span id="f5387"> You should have killed him. </span>
      <span id="f5388"> He has lots of money, and he&#39;s as bad as bad.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5389">&#34;He is not the man I am looking for,&#34; he answered, &#34;and I want no man&#39;s money. </span>
      <span id="f5390"> I want a man&#39;s life. </span>
      <span id="f5391"> The man whose life I want must be nearly forty now. </span>
      <span id="f5392"> This one is little more than a boy. </span>
      <span id="f5393"> Thank God, I have not got his blood upon my hands.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5394">The woman gave a bitter laugh. </span>
      <span id="f5395"> &#34;Little more than a boy!&#34; she sneered. </span>
      <span id="f5396">&#34;Why, man, it&#39;s nigh on eighteen years since Prince Charming made me what I am.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5397">&#34;You lie!&#34; cried James Vane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5398">She raised her hand up to heaven. </span>
      <span id="f5399"> &#34;Before God I am telling the truth,&#34; she cried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5400">&#34;Before God?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5401">&#34;Strike me dumb if it ain&#39;t so. </span>
      <span id="f5402"> He is the worst one that comes here. </span>
      <span id="f5403">They say he has sold himself to the devil for a pretty face. </span>
      <span id="f5404"> It&#39;s nigh on eighteen years since I met him. </span>
      <span id="f5405"> He hasn&#39;t changed much since then. </span>
      <span id="f5406">I have, though,&#34; she added, with a sickly leer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5407">&#34;You swear this?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5408">&#34;I swear it,&#34; came in hoarse echo from her flat mouth. </span>
      <span id="f5409"> &#34;But don&#39;t give me away to him,&#34; she whined; &#34;I am afraid of him. </span>
      <span id="f5410"> Let me have some money for my night&#39;s lodging.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5411">He broke from her with an oath and rushed to the corner of the street, but Dorian Gray had disappeared. </span>
      <span id="f5412"> When he looked back, the woman had vanished also.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>