<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f5413">CHAPTER 17</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f5414">A week later Dorian Gray was sitting in the conservatory at Selby Royal, talking to the pretty Duchess of Monmouth, who with her husband, a jaded-looking man of sixty, was amongst his guests. </span>
      <span id="f5415"> It was tea-time, and the mellow light of the huge, lace-covered lamp that stood on the table lit up the delicate china and hammered silver of the service at which the duchess was presiding. </span>
      <span id="f5416"> Her white hands were moving daintily among the cups, and her full red lips were smiling at something that Dorian had whispered to her. </span>
      <span id="f5417"> Lord Henry was lying back in a silk-draped wicker chair, looking at them. </span>
      <span id="f5418"> On a peach-coloured divan sat Lady Narborough, pretending to listen to the duke&#39;s description of the last Brazilian beetle that he had added to his collection. </span>
      <span id="f5419"> Three young men in elaborate smoking-suits were handing tea-cakes to some of the women. </span>
      <span id="f5420"> The house-party consisted of twelve people, and there were more expected to arrive on the next day.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5421">&#34;What are you two talking about?&#34; said Lord Henry, strolling over to the table and putting his cup down. </span>
      <span id="f5422"> &#34;I hope Dorian has told you about my plan for rechristening everything, Gladys. </span>
      <span id="f5423"> It is a delightful idea.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5424">&#34;But I don&#39;t want to be rechristened, Harry,&#34; rejoined the duchess, looking up at him with her wonderful eyes. </span>
      <span id="f5425"> &#34;I am quite satisfied with my own name, and I am sure Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5426">Gray should be satisfied with his.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5427">&#34;My dear Gladys, I would not alter either name for the world. </span>
      <span id="f5428"> They are both perfect. </span>
      <span id="f5429"> I was thinking chiefly of flowers. </span>
      <span id="f5430"> Yesterday I cut an orchid, for my button-hole. </span>
      <span id="f5431">It was a marvellous spotted thing, as effective as the seven deadly sins. </span>
      <span id="f5432"> In a thoughtless moment I asked one of the gardeners what it was called. </span>
      <span id="f5433"> He told me it was a fine specimen of _Robinsoniana_, or something dreadful of that kind. </span>
      <span id="f5434"> It is a sad truth, but we have lost the faculty of giving lovely names to things. </span>
      <span id="f5435"> Names are everything. </span>
      <span id="f5436"> I never quarrel with actions. </span>
      <span id="f5437"> My one quarrel is with words. </span>
      <span id="f5438"> That is the reason I hate vulgar realism in literature. </span>
      <span id="f5439"> The man who could call a spade a spade should be compelled to use one. </span>
      <span id="f5440"> It is the only thing he is fit for.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5441">&#34;Then what should we call you, Harry?&#34; she asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5442">&#34;His name is Prince Paradox,&#34; said Dorian.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5443">&#34;I recognize him in a flash,&#34; exclaimed the duchess.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5444">&#34;I won&#39;t hear of it,&#34; laughed Lord Henry, sinking into a chair. </span>
      <span id="f5445"> &#34;From a label there is no escape! </span>
      <span id="f5446"> I refuse the title.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5447">&#34;Royalties may not abdicate,&#34; fell as a warning from pretty lips.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5448">&#34;You wish me to defend my throne, then?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5449">&#34;Yes.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5450">&#34;I give the truths of to-morrow.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5451">&#34;I prefer the mistakes of to-day,&#34; she answered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5452">&#34;You disarm me, Gladys,&#34; he cried, catching the wilfulness of her mood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5453">&#34;Of your shield, Harry, not of your spear.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5454">&#34;I never tilt against beauty,&#34; he said, with a wave of his hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5455">&#34;That is your error, Harry, believe me. </span>
      <span id="f5456"> You value beauty far too much.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5457">&#34;How can you say that? </span>
      <span id="f5458"> I admit that I think that it is better to be beautiful than to be good. </span>
      <span id="f5459"> But on the other hand, no one is more ready than I am to acknowledge that it is better to be good than to be ugly.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5460">&#34;Ugliness is one of the seven deadly sins, then?&#34; cried the duchess. </span>
      <span id="f5461">&#34;What becomes of your simile about the orchid?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5462">&#34;Ugliness is one of the seven deadly virtues, Gladys. </span>
      <span id="f5463"> You, as a good Tory, must not underrate them. </span>
      <span id="f5464"> Beer, the Bible, and the seven deadly virtues have made our England what she is.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5465">&#34;You don&#39;t like your country, then?&#34; she asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5466">&#34;I live in it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5467">&#34;That you may censure it the better.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5468">&#34;Would you have me take the verdict of Europe on it?&#34; he inquired.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5469">&#34;What do they say of us?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5470">&#34;That Tartuffe has emigrated to England and opened a shop.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5471">&#34;Is that yours, Harry?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5472">&#34;I give it to you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5473">&#34;I could not use it. </span>
      <span id="f5474"> It is too true.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5475">&#34;You need not be afraid. </span>
      <span id="f5476"> Our countrymen never recognize a description.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5477">&#34;They are practical.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5478">&#34;They are more cunning than practical. </span>
      <span id="f5479"> When they make up their ledger, they balance stupidity by wealth, and vice by hypocrisy.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5480">&#34;Still, we have done great things.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5481">&#34;Great things have been thrust on us, Gladys.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5482">&#34;We have carried their burden.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5483">&#34;Only as far as the Stock Exchange.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5484">She shook her head. </span>
      <span id="f5485"> &#34;I believe in the race,&#34; she cried.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5486">&#34;It represents the survival of the pushing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5487">&#34;It has development.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5488">&#34;Decay fascinates me more.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5489">&#34;What of art?&#34; she asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5490">&#34;It is a malady.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5491">&#34;Love?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5492">&#34;An illusion.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5493">&#34;Religion?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5494">&#34;The fashionable substitute for belief.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5495">&#34;You are a sceptic.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5496">&#34;Never! </span>
      <span id="f5497"> Scepticism is the beginning of faith.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5498">&#34;What are you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5499">&#34;To define is to limit.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5500">&#34;Give me a clue.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5501">&#34;Threads snap. </span>
      <span id="f5502"> You would lose your way in the labyrinth.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5503">&#34;You bewilder me. </span>
      <span id="f5504"> Let us talk of some one else.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5505">&#34;Our host is a delightful topic. </span>
      <span id="f5506"> Years ago he was christened Prince Charming.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5507">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f5508">don&#39;t remind me of that,&#34; cried Dorian Gray.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5509">&#34;Our host is rather horrid this evening,&#34; answered the duchess, colouring. </span>
      <span id="f5510"> &#34;I believe he thinks that Monmouth married me on purely scientific principles as the best specimen he could find of a modern butterfly.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5511">&#34;Well, I hope he won&#39;t stick pins into you, Duchess,&#34; laughed Dorian.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5512">&#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f5513">my maid does that already, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5514">Gray, when she is annoyed with me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5515">&#34;And what does she get annoyed with you about, Duchess?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5516">&#34;For the most trivial things, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5517">Gray, I assure you. </span>
      <span id="f5518"> Usually because I come in at ten minutes to nine and tell her that I must be dressed by half-past eight.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5519">&#34;How unreasonable of her! </span>
      <span id="f5520"> You should give her warning.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5521">&#34;I daren&#39;t, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5522">Gray. </span>
      <span id="f5523"> Why, she invents hats for me. </span>
      <span id="f5524"> You remember the one I wore at Lady Hilstone&#39;s garden-party? </span>
      <span id="f5525"> You don&#39;t, but it is nice of you to pretend that you do. </span>
      <span id="f5526"> Well, she made it out of nothing. </span>
      <span id="f5527"> All good hats are made out of nothing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5528">&#34;Like all good reputations, Gladys,&#34; interrupted Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f5529"> &#34;Every effect that one produces gives one an enemy. </span>
      <span id="f5530"> To be popular one must be a mediocrity.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5531">&#34;Not with women,&#34; said the duchess, shaking her head; &#34;and women rule the world. </span>
      <span id="f5532"> I assure you we can&#39;t bear mediocrities. </span>
      <span id="f5533"> We women, as some one says, love with our ears, just as you men love with your eyes, if you ever love at all.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5534">&#34;It seems to me that we never do anything else,&#34; murmured Dorian.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5535">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f5536">then, you never really love, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5537">Gray,&#34; answered the duchess with mock sadness.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5538">&#34;My dear Gladys!&#34; cried Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f5539"> &#34;How can you say that? </span>
      <span id="f5540"> Romance lives by repetition, and repetition converts an appetite into an art. </span>
      <span id="f5541">Besides, each time that one loves is the only time one has ever loved. </span>
      <span id="f5542">Difference of object does not alter singleness of passion. </span>
      <span id="f5543"> It merely intensifies it. </span>
      <span id="f5544"> We can have in life but one great experience at best, and the secret of life is to reproduce that experience as often as possible.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5545">&#34;Even when one has been wounded by it, Harry?&#34; asked the duchess after a pause.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5546">&#34;Especially when one has been wounded by it,&#34; answered Lord Henry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5547">The duchess turned and looked at Dorian Gray with a curious expression in her eyes. </span>
      <span id="f5548"> &#34;What do you say to that, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5549">Gray?&#34; she inquired.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5550">Dorian hesitated for a moment. </span>
      <span id="f5551"> Then he threw his head back and laughed. </span>
      <span id="f5552"> &#34;I always agree with Harry, Duchess.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5553">&#34;Even when he is wrong?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5554">&#34;Harry is never wrong, Duchess.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5555">&#34;And does his philosophy make you happy?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5556">&#34;I have never searched for happiness. </span>
      <span id="f5557"> Who wants happiness? </span>
      <span id="f5558"> I have searched for pleasure.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5559">&#34;And found it, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5560">Gray?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5561">&#34;Often. </span>
      <span id="f5562"> Too often.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5563">The duchess sighed. </span>
      <span id="f5564"> &#34;I am searching for peace,&#34; she said, &#34;and if I don&#39;t go and dress, I shall have none this evening.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5565">&#34;Let me get you some orchids, Duchess,&#34; cried Dorian, starting to his feet and walking down the conservatory.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5566">&#34;You are flirting disgracefully with him,&#34; said Lord Henry to his cousin. </span>
      <span id="f5567"> &#34;You had better take care. </span>
      <span id="f5568"> He is very fascinating.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5569">&#34;If he were not, there would be no battle.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5570">&#34;Greek meets Greek, then?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5571">&#34;I am on the side of the Trojans. </span>
      <span id="f5572"> They fought for a woman.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5573">&#34;They were defeated.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5574">&#34;There are worse things than capture,&#34; she answered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5575">&#34;You gallop with a loose rein.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5576">&#34;Pace gives life,&#34; was the _riposte_.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5577">&#34;I shall write it in my diary to-night.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5578">&#34;What?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5579">&#34;That a burnt child loves the fire.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5580">&#34;I am not even singed. </span>
      <span id="f5581"> My wings are untouched.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5582">&#34;You use them for everything, except flight.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5583">&#34;Courage has passed from men to women. </span>
      <span id="f5584"> It is a new experience for us.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5585">&#34;You have a rival.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5586">&#34;Who?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5587">He laughed. </span>
      <span id="f5588"> &#34;Lady Narborough,&#34; he whispered. </span>
      <span id="f5589"> &#34;She perfectly adores him.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5590">&#34;You fill me with apprehension. </span>
      <span id="f5591"> The appeal to antiquity is fatal to us who are romanticists.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5592">&#34;Romanticists! </span>
      <span id="f5593"> You have all the methods of science.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5594">&#34;Men have educated us.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5595">&#34;But not explained you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5596">&#34;Describe us as a sex,&#34; was her challenge.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5597">&#34;Sphinxes without secrets.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5598">She looked at him, smiling. </span>
      <span id="f5599"> &#34;How long Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5600">Gray is!&#34; she said. </span>
      <span id="f5601"> &#34;Let us go and help him. </span>
      <span id="f5602"> I have not yet told him the colour of my frock.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5603">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f5604">you must suit your frock to his flowers, Gladys.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5605">&#34;That would be a premature surrender.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5606">&#34;Romantic art begins with its climax.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5607">&#34;I must keep an opportunity for retreat.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5608">&#34;In the Parthian manner?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5609">&#34;They found safety in the desert. </span>
      <span id="f5610"> I could not do that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5611">&#34;Women are not always allowed a choice,&#34; he answered, but hardly had he finished the sentence before from the far end of the conservatory came a stifled groan, followed by the dull sound of a heavy fall. </span>
      <span id="f5612"> Everybody started up. </span>
      <span id="f5613"> The duchess stood motionless in horror. </span>
      <span id="f5614"> And with fear in his eyes, Lord Henry rushed through the flapping palms to find Dorian Gray lying face downwards on the tiled floor in a deathlike swoon.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5615">He was carried at once into the blue drawing-room and laid upon one of the sofas. </span>
      <span id="f5616"> After a short time, he came to himself and looked round with a dazed expression.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5617">&#34;What has happened?&#34; he asked. </span>
      <span id="f5618"> &#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f5619"> I remember. </span>
      <span id="f5620"> Am I safe here, Harry?&#34; He began to tremble.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5621">&#34;My dear Dorian,&#34; answered Lord Henry, &#34;you merely fainted. </span>
      <span id="f5622"> That was all. </span>
      <span id="f5623"> You must have overtired yourself. </span>
      <span id="f5624"> You had better not come down to dinner. </span>
      <span id="f5625"> I will take your place.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5626">&#34;No, I will come down,&#34; he said, struggling to his feet. </span>
      <span id="f5627"> &#34;I would rather come down. </span>
      <span id="f5628"> I must not be alone.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5629">He went to his room and dressed. </span>
      <span id="f5630"> There was a wild recklessness of gaiety in his manner as he sat at table, but now and then a thrill of terror ran through him when he remembered that, pressed against the window of the conservatory, like a white handkerchief, he had seen the face of James Vane watching him.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>