<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER 18</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f5631">CHAPTER 18</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f5632">The next day he did not leave the house, and, indeed, spent most of the time in his own room, sick with a wild terror of dying, and yet indifferent to life itself. </span>
      <span id="f5633"> The consciousness of being hunted, snared, tracked down, had begun to dominate him. </span>
      <span id="f5634"> If the tapestry did but tremble in the wind, he shook. </span>
      <span id="f5635"> The dead leaves that were blown against the leaded panes seemed to him like his own wasted resolutions and wild regrets. </span>
      <span id="f5636"> When he closed his eyes, he saw again the sailor&#39;s face peering through the mist-stained glass, and horror seemed once more to lay its hand upon his heart.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5637">But perhaps it had been only his fancy that had called vengeance out of the night and set the hideous shapes of punishment before him. </span>
      <span id="f5638"> Actual life was chaos, but there was something terribly logical in the imagination. </span>
      <span id="f5639"> It was the imagination that set remorse to dog the feet of sin. </span>
      <span id="f5640"> It was the imagination that made each crime bear its misshapen brood. </span>
      <span id="f5641"> In the common world of fact the wicked were not punished, nor the good rewarded. </span>
      <span id="f5642"> Success was given to the strong, failure thrust upon the weak. </span>
      <span id="f5643"> That was all. </span>
      <span id="f5644"> Besides, had any stranger been prowling round the house, he would have been seen by the servants or the keepers. </span>
      <span id="f5645"> Had any foot-marks been found on the flower-beds, the gardeners would have reported it. </span>
      <span id="f5646"> Yes, it had been merely fancy. </span>
      <span id="f5647">Sibyl Vane&#39;s brother had not come back to kill him. </span>
      <span id="f5648"> He had sailed away in his ship to founder in some winter sea. </span>
      <span id="f5649"> From him, at any rate, he was safe. </span>
      <span id="f5650"> Why, the man did not know who he was, could not know who he was. </span>
      <span id="f5651"> The mask of youth had saved him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5652">And yet if it had been merely an illusion, how terrible it was to think that conscience could raise such fearful phantoms, and give them visible form, and make them move before one! </span>
      <span id="f5653"> What sort of life would his be if, day and night, shadows of his crime were to peer at him from silent corners, to mock him from secret places, to whisper in his ear as he sat at the feast, to wake him with icy fingers as he lay asleep! </span>
      <span id="f5654">As the thought crept through his brain, he grew pale with terror, and the air seemed to him to have become suddenly colder. </span>
      <span id="f5655"> Oh! </span>
      <span id="f5656">in what a wild hour of madness he had killed his friend! </span>
      <span id="f5657"> How ghastly the mere memory of the scene! </span>
      <span id="f5658"> He saw it all again. </span>
      <span id="f5659"> Each hideous detail came back to him with added horror. </span>
      <span id="f5660"> Out of the black cave of time, terrible and swathed in scarlet, rose the image of his sin. </span>
      <span id="f5661"> When Lord Henry came in at six o&#39;clock, he found him crying as one whose heart will break.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5662">It was not till the third day that he ventured to go out. </span>
      <span id="f5663"> There was something in the clear, pine-scented air of that winter morning that seemed to bring him back his joyousness and his ardour for life. </span>
      <span id="f5664"> But it was not merely the physical conditions of environment that had caused the change. </span>
      <span id="f5665"> His own nature had revolted against the excess of anguish that had sought to maim and mar the perfection of its calm. </span>
      <span id="f5666">With subtle and finely wrought temperaments it is always so. </span>
      <span id="f5667"> Their strong passions must either bruise or bend. </span>
      <span id="f5668"> They either slay the man, or themselves die. </span>
      <span id="f5669"> Shallow sorrows and shallow loves live on. </span>
      <span id="f5670"> The loves and sorrows that are great are destroyed by their own plenitude. </span>
      <span id="f5671">Besides, he had convinced himself that he had been the victim of a terror-stricken imagination, and looked back now on his fears with something of pity and not a little of contempt.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5672">After breakfast, he walked with the duchess for an hour in the garden and then drove across the park to join the shooting-party. </span>
      <span id="f5673">The crisp frost lay like salt upon the grass. </span>
      <span id="f5674"> The sky was an inverted cup of blue metal. </span>
      <span id="f5675"> A thin film of ice bordered the flat, reed-grown lake.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5676">At the corner of the pine-wood he caught sight of Sir Geoffrey Clouston, the duchess&#39;s brother, jerking two spent cartridges out of his gun. </span>
      <span id="f5677"> He jumped from the cart, and having told the groom to take the mare home, made his way towards his guest through the withered bracken and rough undergrowth.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5678">&#34;Have you had good sport, Geoffrey?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5679">&#34;Not very good, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f5680"> I think most of the birds have gone to the open. </span>
      <span id="f5681"> I dare say it will be better after lunch, when we get to new ground.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5682">Dorian strolled along by his side. </span>
      <span id="f5683"> The keen aromatic air, the brown and red lights that glimmered in the wood, the hoarse cries of the beaters ringing out from time to time, and the sharp snaps of the guns that followed, fascinated him and filled him with a sense of delightful freedom. </span>
      <span id="f5684"> He was dominated by the carelessness of happiness, by the high indifference of joy.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5685">Suddenly from a lumpy tussock of old grass some twenty yards in front of them, with black-tipped ears erect and long hinder limbs throwing it forward, started a hare. </span>
      <span id="f5686"> It bolted for a thicket of alders. </span>
      <span id="f5687"> Sir Geoffrey put his gun to his shoulder, but there was something in the animal&#39;s grace of movement that strangely charmed Dorian Gray, and he cried out at once, &#34;Don&#39;t shoot it, Geoffrey. </span>
      <span id="f5688"> Let it live.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5689">&#34;What nonsense, Dorian!&#34; laughed his companion, and as the hare bounded into the thicket, he fired. </span>
      <span id="f5690"> There were two cries heard, the cry of a hare in pain, which is dreadful, the cry of a man in agony, which is worse.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5691">&#34;Good heavens! </span>
      <span id="f5692"> I have hit a beater!&#34; exclaimed Sir Geoffrey. </span>
      <span id="f5693"> &#34;What an ass the man was to get in front of the guns! </span>
      <span id="f5694"> Stop shooting there!&#34; he called out at the top of his voice. </span>
      <span id="f5695"> &#34;A man is hurt.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5696">The head-keeper came running up with a stick in his hand.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5697">&#34;Where, sir? </span>
      <span id="f5698"> Where is he?&#34; he shouted. </span>
      <span id="f5699"> At the same time, the firing ceased along the line.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5700">&#34;Here,&#34; answered Sir Geoffrey angrily, hurrying towards the thicket. </span>
      <span id="f5701">&#34;Why on earth don&#39;t you keep your men back? </span>
      <span id="f5702"> Spoiled my shooting for the day.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5703">Dorian watched them as they plunged into the alder-clump, brushing the lithe swinging branches aside. </span>
      <span id="f5704"> In a few moments they emerged, dragging a body after them into the sunlight. </span>
      <span id="f5705"> He turned away in horror. </span>
      <span id="f5706"> It seemed to him that misfortune followed wherever he went. </span>
      <span id="f5707"> He heard Sir Geoffrey ask if the man was really dead, and the affirmative answer of the keeper. </span>
      <span id="f5708"> The wood seemed to him to have become suddenly alive with faces. </span>
      <span id="f5709"> There was the trampling of myriad feet and the low buzz of voices. </span>
      <span id="f5710"> A great copper-breasted pheasant came beating through the boughs overhead.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5711">After a few moments--that were to him, in his perturbed state, like endless hours of pain--he felt a hand laid on his shoulder. </span>
      <span id="f5712"> He started and looked round.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5713">&#34;Dorian,&#34; said Lord Henry, &#34;I had better tell them that the shooting is stopped for to-day. </span>
      <span id="f5714">It would not look well to go on.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5715">&#34;I wish it were stopped for ever, Harry,&#34; he answered bitterly. </span>
      <span id="f5716"> &#34;The whole thing is hideous and cruel. </span>
      <span id="f5717"> Is the man ...?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5718">He could not finish the sentence.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5719">&#34;I am afraid so,&#34; rejoined Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f5720"> &#34;He got the whole charge of shot in his chest. </span>
      <span id="f5721"> He must have died almost instantaneously. </span>
      <span id="f5722"> Come; let us go home.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5723">They walked side by side in the direction of the avenue for nearly fifty yards without speaking. </span>
      <span id="f5724"> Then Dorian looked at Lord Henry and said, with a heavy sigh, &#34;It is a bad omen, Harry, a very bad omen.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5725">&#34;What is?&#34; asked Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f5726"> &#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f5727">this accident, I suppose. </span>
      <span id="f5728"> My dear fellow, it can&#39;t be helped. </span>
      <span id="f5729"> It was the man&#39;s own fault. </span>
      <span id="f5730"> Why did he get in front of the guns? </span>
      <span id="f5731"> Besides, it is nothing to us. </span>
      <span id="f5732"> It is rather awkward for Geoffrey, of course. </span>
      <span id="f5733"> It does not do to pepper beaters. </span>
      <span id="f5734"> It makes people think that one is a wild shot. </span>
      <span id="f5735"> And Geoffrey is not; he shoots very straight. </span>
      <span id="f5736"> But there is no use talking about the matter.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5737">Dorian shook his head. </span>
      <span id="f5738"> &#34;It is a bad omen, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f5739"> I feel as if something horrible were going to happen to some of us. </span>
      <span id="f5740"> To myself, perhaps,&#34; he added, passing his hand over his eyes, with a gesture of pain.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5741">The elder man laughed. </span>
      <span id="f5742"> &#34;The only horrible thing in the world is _ennui_, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f5743"> That is the one sin for which there is no forgiveness. </span>
      <span id="f5744"> But we are not likely to suffer from it unless these fellows keep chattering about this thing at dinner. </span>
      <span id="f5745"> I must tell them that the subject is to be tabooed. </span>
      <span id="f5746"> As for omens, there is no such thing as an omen. </span>
      <span id="f5747"> Destiny does not send us heralds. </span>
      <span id="f5748"> She is too wise or too cruel for that. </span>
      <span id="f5749">Besides, what on earth could happen to you, Dorian? </span>
      <span id="f5750"> You have everything in the world that a man can want. </span>
      <span id="f5751"> There is no one who would not be delighted to change places with you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5752">&#34;There is no one with whom I would not change places, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f5753"> Don&#39;t laugh like that. </span>
      <span id="f5754"> I am telling you the truth. </span>
      <span id="f5755"> The wretched peasant who has just died is better off than I am. </span>
      <span id="f5756"> I have no terror of death. </span>
      <span id="f5757"> It is the coming of death that terrifies me. </span>
      <span id="f5758"> Its monstrous wings seem to wheel in the leaden air around me. </span>
      <span id="f5759"> Good heavens! </span>
      <span id="f5760">don&#39;t you see a man moving behind the trees there, watching me, waiting for me?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5761">Lord Henry looked in the direction in which the trembling gloved hand was pointing. </span>
      <span id="f5762"> &#34;Yes,&#34; he said, smiling, &#34;I see the gardener waiting for you. </span>
      <span id="f5763"> I suppose he wants to ask you what flowers you wish to have on the table to-night. </span>
      <span id="f5764">How absurdly nervous you are, my dear fellow! </span>
      <span id="f5765"> You must come and see my doctor, when we get back to town.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5766">Dorian heaved a sigh of relief as he saw the gardener approaching. </span>
      <span id="f5767"> The man touched his hat, glanced for a moment at Lord Henry in a hesitating manner, and then produced a letter, which he handed to his master. </span>
      <span id="f5768">&#34;Her Grace told me to wait for an answer,&#34; he murmured.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5769">Dorian put the letter into his pocket. </span>
      <span id="f5770"> &#34;Tell her Grace that I am coming in,&#34; he said, coldly. </span>
      <span id="f5771"> The man turned round and went rapidly in the direction of the house.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5772">&#34;How fond women are of doing dangerous things!&#34; laughed Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f5773">&#34;It is one of the qualities in them that I admire most. </span>
      <span id="f5774"> A woman will flirt with anybody in the world as long as other people are looking on.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5775">&#34;How fond you are of saying dangerous things, Harry! </span>
      <span id="f5776"> In the present instance, you are quite astray. </span>
      <span id="f5777"> I like the duchess very much, but I don&#39;t love her.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5778">&#34;And the duchess loves you very much, but she likes you less, so you are excellently matched.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5779">&#34;You are talking scandal, Harry, and there is never any basis for scandal.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5780">&#34;The basis of every scandal is an immoral certainty,&#34; said Lord Henry, lighting a cigarette.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5781">&#34;You would sacrifice anybody, Harry, for the sake of an epigram.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5782">&#34;The world goes to the altar of its own accord,&#34; was the answer.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5783">&#34;I wish I could love,&#34; cried Dorian Gray with a deep note of pathos in his voice. </span>
      <span id="f5784"> &#34;But I seem to have lost the passion and forgotten the desire. </span>
      <span id="f5785"> I am too much concentrated on myself. </span>
      <span id="f5786"> My own personality has become a burden to me. </span>
      <span id="f5787"> I want to escape, to go away, to forget. </span>
      <span id="f5788"> It was silly of me to come down here at all. </span>
      <span id="f5789"> I think I shall send a wire to Harvey to have the yacht got ready. </span>
      <span id="f5790"> On a yacht one is safe.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5791">&#34;Safe from what, Dorian? </span>
      <span id="f5792"> You are in some trouble. </span>
      <span id="f5793"> Why not tell me what it is? </span>
      <span id="f5794"> You know I would help you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5795">&#34;I can&#39;t tell you, Harry,&#34; he answered sadly. </span>
      <span id="f5796"> &#34;And I dare say it is only a fancy of mine. </span>
      <span id="f5797"> This unfortunate accident has upset me. </span>
      <span id="f5798"> I have a horrible presentiment that something of the kind may happen to me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5799">&#34;What nonsense!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5800">&#34;I hope it is, but I can&#39;t help feeling it. </span>
      <span id="f5801"> Ah! </span>
      <span id="f5802">here is the duchess, looking like Artemis in a tailor-made gown. </span>
      <span id="f5803"> You see we have come back, Duchess.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5804">&#34;I have heard all about it, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5805">Gray,&#34; she answered. </span>
      <span id="f5806"> &#34;Poor Geoffrey is terribly upset. </span>
      <span id="f5807"> And it seems that you asked him not to shoot the hare. </span>
      <span id="f5808">How curious!&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5809">&#34;Yes, it was very curious. </span>
      <span id="f5810"> I don&#39;t know what made me say it. </span>
      <span id="f5811"> Some whim, I suppose. </span>
      <span id="f5812"> It looked the loveliest of little live things. </span>
      <span id="f5813"> But I am sorry they told you about the man. </span>
      <span id="f5814"> It is a hideous subject.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5815">&#34;It is an annoying subject,&#34; broke in Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f5816"> &#34;It has no psychological value at all. </span>
      <span id="f5817"> Now if Geoffrey had done the thing on purpose, how interesting he would be! </span>
      <span id="f5818"> I should like to know some one who had committed a real murder.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5819">&#34;How horrid of you, Harry!&#34; cried the duchess. </span>
      <span id="f5820"> &#34;Isn&#39;t it, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5821">Gray? </span>
      <span id="f5822">Harry, Mr. </span>
      <span id="f5823">Gray is ill again. </span>
      <span id="f5824"> He is going to faint.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5825">Dorian drew himself up with an effort and smiled. </span>
      <span id="f5826"> &#34;It is nothing, Duchess,&#34; he murmured; &#34;my nerves are dreadfully out of order. </span>
      <span id="f5827"> That is all. </span>
      <span id="f5828"> I am afraid I walked too far this morning. </span>
      <span id="f5829"> I didn&#39;t hear what Harry said. </span>
      <span id="f5830"> Was it very bad? </span>
      <span id="f5831"> You must tell me some other time. </span>
      <span id="f5832"> I think I must go and lie down. </span>
      <span id="f5833"> You will excuse me, won&#39;t you?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5834">They had reached the great flight of steps that led from the conservatory on to the terrace. </span>
      <span id="f5835"> As the glass door closed behind Dorian, Lord Henry turned and looked at the duchess with his slumberous eyes. </span>
      <span id="f5836"> &#34;Are you very much in love with him?&#34; he asked.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5837">She did not answer for some time, but stood gazing at the landscape. </span>
      <span id="f5838">&#34;I wish I knew,&#34; she said at last.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5839">He shook his head. </span>
      <span id="f5840"> &#34;Knowledge would be fatal. </span>
      <span id="f5841"> It is the uncertainty that charms one. </span>
      <span id="f5842"> A mist makes things wonderful.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5843">&#34;One may lose one&#39;s way.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5844">&#34;All ways end at the same point, my dear Gladys.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5845">&#34;What is that?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5846">&#34;Disillusion.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5847">&#34;It was my _debut_ in life,&#34; she sighed.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5848">&#34;It came to you crowned.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5849">&#34;I am tired of strawberry leaves.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5850">&#34;They become you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5851">&#34;Only in public.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5852">&#34;You would miss them,&#34; said Lord Henry.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5853">&#34;I will not part with a petal.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5854">&#34;Monmouth has ears.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5855">&#34;Old age is dull of hearing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5856">&#34;Has he never been jealous?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5857">&#34;I wish he had been.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5858">He glanced about as if in search of something. </span>
      <span id="f5859"> &#34;What are you looking for?&#34; she inquired.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5860">&#34;The button from your foil,&#34; he answered. </span>
      <span id="f5861"> &#34;You have dropped it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5862">She laughed. </span>
      <span id="f5863"> &#34;I have still the mask.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5864">&#34;It makes your eyes lovelier,&#34; was his reply.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5865">She laughed again. </span>
      <span id="f5866"> Her teeth showed like white seeds in a scarlet fruit.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5867">Upstairs, in his own room, Dorian Gray was lying on a sofa, with terror in every tingling fibre of his body. </span>
      <span id="f5868"> Life had suddenly become too hideous a burden for him to bear. </span>
      <span id="f5869"> The dreadful death of the unlucky beater, shot in the thicket like a wild animal, had seemed to him to pre-figure death for himself also. </span>
      <span id="f5870"> He had nearly swooned at what Lord Henry had said in a chance mood of cynical jesting.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5871">At five o&#39;clock he rang his bell for his servant and gave him orders to pack his things for the night-express to town, and to have the brougham at the door by eight-thirty. </span>
      <span id="f5872">He was determined not to sleep another night at Selby Royal. </span>
      <span id="f5873"> It was an ill-omened place. </span>
      <span id="f5874"> Death walked there in the sunlight. </span>
      <span id="f5875"> The grass of the forest had been spotted with blood.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5876">Then he wrote a note to Lord Henry, telling him that he was going up to town to consult his doctor and asking him to entertain his guests in his absence. </span>
      <span id="f5877"> As he was putting it into the envelope, a knock came to the door, and his valet informed him that the head-keeper wished to see him. </span>
      <span id="f5878"> He frowned and bit his lip. </span>
      <span id="f5879"> &#34;Send him in,&#34; he muttered, after some moments&#39; hesitation.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5880">As soon as the man entered, Dorian pulled his chequebook out of a drawer and spread it out before him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5881">&#34;I suppose you have come about the unfortunate accident of this morning, Thornton?&#34; he said, taking up a pen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5882">&#34;Yes, sir,&#34; answered the gamekeeper.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5883">&#34;Was the poor fellow married? </span>
      <span id="f5884"> Had he any people dependent on him?&#34; asked Dorian, looking bored. </span>
      <span id="f5885"> &#34;If so, I should not like them to be left in want, and will send them any sum of money you may think necessary.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5886">&#34;We don&#39;t know who he is, sir. </span>
      <span id="f5887"> That is what I took the liberty of coming to you about.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5888">&#34;Don&#39;t know who he is?&#34; said Dorian, listlessly. </span>
      <span id="f5889"> &#34;What do you mean? </span>
      <span id="f5890">Wasn&#39;t he one of your men?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5891">&#34;No, sir. </span>
      <span id="f5892"> Never saw him before. </span>
      <span id="f5893"> Seems like a sailor, sir.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5894">The pen dropped from Dorian Gray&#39;s hand, and he felt as if his heart had suddenly stopped beating. </span>
      <span id="f5895"> &#34;A sailor?&#34; he cried out. </span>
      <span id="f5896"> &#34;Did you say a sailor?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5897">&#34;Yes, sir. </span>
      <span id="f5898"> He looks as if he had been a sort of sailor; tattooed on both arms, and that kind of thing.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5899">&#34;Was there anything found on him?&#34; said Dorian, leaning forward and looking at the man with startled eyes. </span>
      <span id="f5900"> &#34;Anything that would tell his name?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5901">&#34;Some money, sir--not much, and a six-shooter. </span>
      <span id="f5902">There was no name of any kind. </span>
      <span id="f5903"> A decent-looking man, sir, but rough-like. </span>
      <span id="f5904">A sort of sailor we think.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5905">Dorian started to his feet. </span>
      <span id="f5906"> A terrible hope fluttered past him. </span>
      <span id="f5907"> He clutched at it madly. </span>
      <span id="f5908"> &#34;Where is the body?&#34; he exclaimed. </span>
      <span id="f5909"> &#34;Quick! </span>
      <span id="f5910"> I must see it at once.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5911">&#34;It is in an empty stable in the Home Farm, sir. </span>
      <span id="f5912"> The folk don&#39;t like to have that sort of thing in their houses. </span>
      <span id="f5913"> They say a corpse brings bad luck.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5914">&#34;The Home Farm! </span>
      <span id="f5915"> Go there at once and meet me. </span>
      <span id="f5916"> Tell one of the grooms to bring my horse round. </span>
      <span id="f5917"> No. </span>
      <span id="f5918">Never mind. </span>
      <span id="f5919"> I&#39;ll go to the stables myself. </span>
      <span id="f5920"> It will save time.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5921">In less than a quarter of an hour, Dorian Gray was galloping down the long avenue as hard as he could go. </span>
      <span id="f5922"> The trees seemed to sweep past him in spectral procession, and wild shadows to fling themselves across his path. </span>
      <span id="f5923"> Once the mare swerved at a white gate-post and nearly threw him. </span>
      <span id="f5924">He lashed her across the neck with his crop. </span>
      <span id="f5925"> She cleft the dusky air like an arrow. </span>
      <span id="f5926"> The stones flew from her hoofs.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5927">At last he reached the Home Farm. </span>
      <span id="f5928"> Two men were loitering in the yard. </span>
      <span id="f5929">He leaped from the saddle and threw the reins to one of them. </span>
      <span id="f5930"> In the farthest stable a light was glimmering. </span>
      <span id="f5931"> Something seemed to tell him that the body was there, and he hurried to the door and put his hand upon the latch.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5932">There he paused for a moment, feeling that he was on the brink of a discovery that would either make or mar his life. </span>
      <span id="f5933"> Then he thrust the door open and entered.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5934">On a heap of sacking in the far corner was lying the dead body of a man dressed in a coarse shirt and a pair of blue trousers. </span>
      <span id="f5935"> A spotted handkerchief had been placed over the face. </span>
      <span id="f5936"> A coarse candle, stuck in a bottle, sputtered beside it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5937">Dorian Gray shuddered. </span>
      <span id="f5938"> He felt that his could not be the hand to take the handkerchief away, and called out to one of the farm-servants to come to him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5939">&#34;Take that thing off the face. </span>
      <span id="f5940"> I wish to see it,&#34; he said, clutching at the door-post for support.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5941">When the farm-servant had done so, he stepped forward. </span>
      <span id="f5942"> A cry of joy broke from his lips. </span>
      <span id="f5943"> The man who had been shot in the thicket was James Vane.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5944">He stood there for some minutes looking at the dead body. </span>
      <span id="f5945"> As he rode home, his eyes were full of tears, for he knew he was safe.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>