<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER 19</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f5946">CHAPTER 19</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f5947">&#34;There is no use your telling me that you are going to be good,&#34; cried Lord Henry, dipping his white fingers into a red copper bowl filled with rose-water. </span>
      <span id="f5948">&#34;You are quite perfect. </span>
      <span id="f5949"> Pray, don&#39;t change.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5950">Dorian Gray shook his head. </span>
      <span id="f5951"> &#34;No, Harry, I have done too many dreadful things in my life. </span>
      <span id="f5952"> I am not going to do any more. </span>
      <span id="f5953"> I began my good actions yesterday.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5954">&#34;Where were you yesterday?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5955">&#34;In the country, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f5956"> I was staying at a little inn by myself.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5957">&#34;My dear boy,&#34; said Lord Henry, smiling, &#34;anybody can be good in the country. </span>
      <span id="f5958"> There are no temptations there. </span>
      <span id="f5959"> That is the reason why people who live out of town are so absolutely uncivilized. </span>
      <span id="f5960">Civilization is not by any means an easy thing to attain to. </span>
      <span id="f5961"> There are only two ways by which man can reach it. </span>
      <span id="f5962"> One is by being cultured, the other by being corrupt. </span>
      <span id="f5963"> Country people have no opportunity of being either, so they stagnate.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5964">&#34;Culture and corruption,&#34; echoed Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f5965"> &#34;I have known something of both. </span>
      <span id="f5966"> It seems terrible to me now that they should ever be found together. </span>
      <span id="f5967"> For I have a new ideal, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f5968"> I am going to alter. </span>
      <span id="f5969"> I think I have altered.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5970">&#34;You have not yet told me what your good action was. </span>
      <span id="f5971"> Or did you say you had done more than one?&#34; asked his companion as he spilled into his plate a little crimson pyramid of seeded strawberries and, through a perforated, shell-shaped spoon, snowed white sugar upon them.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5972">&#34;I can tell you, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f5973"> It is not a story I could tell to any one else. </span>
      <span id="f5974"> I spared somebody. </span>
      <span id="f5975"> It sounds vain, but you understand what I mean. </span>
      <span id="f5976"> She was quite beautiful and wonderfully like Sibyl Vane. </span>
      <span id="f5977"> I think it was that which first attracted me to her. </span>
      <span id="f5978"> You remember Sibyl, don&#39;t you? </span>
      <span id="f5979"> How long ago that seems! </span>
      <span id="f5980"> Well, Hetty was not one of our own class, of course. </span>
      <span id="f5981"> She was simply a girl in a village. </span>
      <span id="f5982"> But I really loved her. </span>
      <span id="f5983"> I am quite sure that I loved her. </span>
      <span id="f5984"> All during this wonderful May that we have been having, I used to run down and see her two or three times a week. </span>
      <span id="f5985"> Yesterday she met me in a little orchard. </span>
      <span id="f5986">The apple-blossoms kept tumbling down on her hair, and she was laughing. </span>
      <span id="f5987"> We were to have gone away together this morning at dawn. </span>
      <span id="f5988">Suddenly I determined to leave her as flowerlike as I had found her.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5989">&#34;I should think the novelty of the emotion must have given you a thrill of real pleasure, Dorian,&#34; interrupted Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f5990"> &#34;But I can finish your idyll for you. </span>
      <span id="f5991"> You gave her good advice and broke her heart. </span>
      <span id="f5992">That was the beginning of your reformation.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5993">&#34;Harry, you are horrible! </span>
      <span id="f5994"> You mustn&#39;t say these dreadful things. </span>
      <span id="f5995">Hetty&#39;s heart is not broken. </span>
      <span id="f5996"> Of course, she cried and all that. </span>
      <span id="f5997"> But there is no disgrace upon her. </span>
      <span id="f5998"> She can live, like Perdita, in her garden of mint and marigold.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f5999">&#34;And weep over a faithless Florizel,&#34; said Lord Henry, laughing, as he leaned back in his chair. </span>
      <span id="f6000"> &#34;My dear Dorian, you have the most curiously boyish moods. </span>
      <span id="f6001"> Do you think this girl will ever be really content now with any one of her own rank? </span>
      <span id="f6002"> I suppose she will be married some day to a rough carter or a grinning ploughman. </span>
      <span id="f6003"> Well, the fact of having met you, and loved you, will teach her to despise her husband, and she will be wretched. </span>
      <span id="f6004"> From a moral point of view, I cannot say that I think much of your great renunciation. </span>
      <span id="f6005"> Even as a beginning, it is poor. </span>
      <span id="f6006"> Besides, how do you know that Hetty isn&#39;t floating at the present moment in some starlit mill-pond, with lovely water-lilies round her, like Ophelia?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6007">&#34;I can&#39;t bear this, Harry! </span>
      <span id="f6008"> You mock at everything, and then suggest the most serious tragedies. </span>
      <span id="f6009"> I am sorry I told you now. </span>
      <span id="f6010"> I don&#39;t care what you say to me. </span>
      <span id="f6011"> I know I was right in acting as I did. </span>
      <span id="f6012"> Poor Hetty! </span>
      <span id="f6013"> As I rode past the farm this morning, I saw her white face at the window, like a spray of jasmine. </span>
      <span id="f6014"> Don&#39;t let us talk about it any more, and don&#39;t try to persuade me that the first good action I have done for years, the first little bit of self-sacrifice I have ever known, is really a sort of sin. </span>
      <span id="f6015"> I want to be better. </span>
      <span id="f6016"> I am going to be better. </span>
      <span id="f6017"> Tell me something about yourself. </span>
      <span id="f6018"> What is going on in town? </span>
      <span id="f6019">I have not been to the club for days.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6020">&#34;The people are still discussing poor Basil&#39;s disappearance.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6021">&#34;I should have thought they had got tired of that by this time,&#34; said Dorian, pouring himself out some wine and frowning slightly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6022">&#34;My dear boy, they have only been talking about it for six weeks, and the British public are really not equal to the mental strain of having more than one topic every three months. </span>
      <span id="f6023"> They have been very fortunate lately, however. </span>
      <span id="f6024"> They have had my own divorce-case and Alan Campbell&#39;s suicide. </span>
      <span id="f6025"> Now they have got the mysterious disappearance of an artist. </span>
      <span id="f6026">Scotland Yard still insists that the man in the grey ulster who left for Paris by the midnight train on the ninth of November was poor Basil, and the French police declare that Basil never arrived in Paris at all. </span>
      <span id="f6027"> I suppose in about a fortnight we shall be told that he has been seen in San Francisco. </span>
      <span id="f6028"> It is an odd thing, but every one who disappears is said to be seen at San Francisco. </span>
      <span id="f6029"> It must be a delightful city, and possess all the attractions of the next world.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6030">&#34;What do you think has happened to Basil?&#34; asked Dorian, holding up his Burgundy against the light and wondering how it was that he could discuss the matter so calmly.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6031">&#34;I have not the slightest idea. </span>
      <span id="f6032"> If Basil chooses to hide himself, it is no business of mine. </span>
      <span id="f6033"> If he is dead, I don&#39;t want to think about him. </span>
      <span id="f6034"> Death is the only thing that ever terrifies me. </span>
      <span id="f6035"> I hate it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6036">&#34;Why?&#34; said the younger man wearily.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6037">&#34;Because,&#34; said Lord Henry, passing beneath his nostrils the gilt trellis of an open vinaigrette box, &#34;one can survive everything nowadays except that. </span>
      <span id="f6038"> Death and vulgarity are the only two facts in the nineteenth century that one cannot explain away. </span>
      <span id="f6039"> Let us have our coffee in the music-room, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f6040"> You must play Chopin to me. </span>
      <span id="f6041"> The man with whom my wife ran away played Chopin exquisitely. </span>
      <span id="f6042"> Poor Victoria! </span>
      <span id="f6043">I was very fond of her. </span>
      <span id="f6044"> The house is rather lonely without her. </span>
      <span id="f6045"> Of course, married life is merely a habit, a bad habit. </span>
      <span id="f6046"> But then one regrets the loss even of one&#39;s worst habits. </span>
      <span id="f6047"> Perhaps one regrets them the most. </span>
      <span id="f6048"> They are such an essential part of one&#39;s personality.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6049">Dorian said nothing, but rose from the table, and passing into the next room, sat down to the piano and let his fingers stray across the white and black ivory of the keys. </span>
      <span id="f6050"> After the coffee had been brought in, he stopped, and looking over at Lord Henry, said, &#34;Harry, did it ever occur to you that Basil was murdered?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6051">Lord Henry yawned. </span>
      <span id="f6052"> &#34;Basil was very popular, and always wore a Waterbury watch. </span>
      <span id="f6053"> Why should he have been murdered? </span>
      <span id="f6054"> He was not clever enough to have enemies. </span>
      <span id="f6055"> Of course, he had a wonderful genius for painting. </span>
      <span id="f6056"> But a man can paint like Velasquez and yet be as dull as possible. </span>
      <span id="f6057"> Basil was really rather dull. </span>
      <span id="f6058"> He only interested me once, and that was when he told me, years ago, that he had a wild adoration for you and that you were the dominant motive of his art.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6059">&#34;I was very fond of Basil,&#34; said Dorian with a note of sadness in his voice. </span>
      <span id="f6060"> &#34;But don&#39;t people say that he was murdered?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6061">&#34;Oh, some of the papers do. </span>
      <span id="f6062"> It does not seem to me to be at all probable. </span>
      <span id="f6063"> I know there are dreadful places in Paris, but Basil was not the sort of man to have gone to them. </span>
      <span id="f6064"> He had no curiosity. </span>
      <span id="f6065"> It was his chief defect.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6066">&#34;What would you say, Harry, if I told you that I had murdered Basil?&#34; said the younger man. </span>
      <span id="f6067"> He watched him intently after he had spoken.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6068">&#34;I would say, my dear fellow, that you were posing for a character that doesn&#39;t suit you. </span>
      <span id="f6069"> All crime is vulgar, just as all vulgarity is crime. </span>
      <span id="f6070">It is not in you, Dorian, to commit a murder. </span>
      <span id="f6071"> I am sorry if I hurt your vanity by saying so, but I assure you it is true. </span>
      <span id="f6072"> Crime belongs exclusively to the lower orders. </span>
      <span id="f6073"> I don&#39;t blame them in the smallest degree. </span>
      <span id="f6074"> I should fancy that crime was to them what art is to us, simply a method of procuring extraordinary sensations.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6075">&#34;A method of procuring sensations? </span>
      <span id="f6076"> Do you think, then, that a man who has once committed a murder could possibly do the same crime again? </span>
      <span id="f6077">Don&#39;t tell me that.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6078">&#34;Oh! </span>
      <span id="f6079">anything becomes a pleasure if one does it too often,&#34; cried Lord Henry, laughing. </span>
      <span id="f6080"> &#34;That is one of the most important secrets of life. </span>
      <span id="f6081">I should fancy, however, that murder is always a mistake. </span>
      <span id="f6082"> One should never do anything that one cannot talk about after dinner. </span>
      <span id="f6083"> But let us pass from poor Basil. </span>
      <span id="f6084"> I wish I could believe that he had come to such a really romantic end as you suggest, but I can&#39;t. </span>
      <span id="f6085">I dare say he fell into the Seine off an omnibus and that the conductor hushed up the scandal. </span>
      <span id="f6086"> Yes:  I should fancy that was his end. </span>
      <span id="f6087"> I see him lying now on his back under those dull-green waters, with the heavy barges floating over him and long weeds catching in his hair. </span>
      <span id="f6088"> Do you know, I don&#39;t think he would have done much more good work. </span>
      <span id="f6089"> During the last ten years his painting had gone off very much.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6090">Dorian heaved a sigh, and Lord Henry strolled across the room and began to stroke the head of a curious Java parrot, a large, grey-plumaged bird with pink crest and tail, that was balancing itself upon a bamboo perch. </span>
      <span id="f6091"> As his pointed fingers touched it, it dropped the white scurf of crinkled lids over black, glasslike eyes and began to sway backwards and forwards.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6092">&#34;Yes,&#34; he continued, turning round and taking his handkerchief out of his pocket; &#34;his painting had quite gone off. </span>
      <span id="f6093"> It seemed to me to have lost something. </span>
      <span id="f6094"> It had lost an ideal. </span>
      <span id="f6095"> When you and he ceased to be great friends, he ceased to be a great artist. </span>
      <span id="f6096"> What was it separated you? </span>
      <span id="f6097"> I suppose he bored you. </span>
      <span id="f6098"> If so, he never forgave you. </span>
      <span id="f6099"> It&#39;s a habit bores have. </span>
      <span id="f6100"> By the way, what has become of that wonderful portrait he did of you? </span>
      <span id="f6101"> I don&#39;t think I have ever seen it since he finished it. </span>
      <span id="f6102"> Oh! </span>
      <span id="f6103"> I remember your telling me years ago that you had sent it down to Selby, and that it had got mislaid or stolen on the way. </span>
      <span id="f6104"> You never got it back? </span>
      <span id="f6105"> What a pity! </span>
      <span id="f6106">it was really a masterpiece. </span>
      <span id="f6107"> I remember I wanted to buy it. </span>
      <span id="f6108"> I wish I had now. </span>
      <span id="f6109"> It belonged to Basil&#39;s best period. </span>
      <span id="f6110"> Since then, his work was that curious mixture of bad painting and good intentions that always entitles a man to be called a representative British artist. </span>
      <span id="f6111"> Did you advertise for it? </span>
      <span id="f6112"> You should.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6113">&#34;I forget,&#34; said Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f6114"> &#34;I suppose I did. </span>
      <span id="f6115"> But I never really liked it. </span>
      <span id="f6116"> I am sorry I sat for it. </span>
      <span id="f6117"> The memory of the thing is hateful to me. </span>
      <span id="f6118"> Why do you talk of it? </span>
      <span id="f6119"> It used to remind me of those curious lines in some play--Hamlet, I think--how do they run?--</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6120">&#34;Like the painting of a sorrow,      A face without a heart.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6121">Yes:  that is what it was like.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6122">Lord Henry laughed. </span>
      <span id="f6123"> &#34;If a man treats life artistically, his brain is his heart,&#34; he answered, sinking into an arm-chair.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6124">Dorian Gray shook his head and struck some soft chords on the piano. </span>
      <span id="f6125">&#34;&#39;Like the painting of a sorrow,&#39;&#34; he repeated, &#34;&#39;a face without a heart.&#39;&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6126">The elder man lay back and looked at him with half-closed eyes. </span>
      <span id="f6127"> &#34;By the way, Dorian,&#34; he said after a pause, &#34;&#39;what does it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose--how does the quotation run?--his own soul&#39;?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6128">The music jarred, and Dorian Gray started and stared at his friend. </span>
      <span id="f6129">&#34;Why do you ask me that, Harry?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6130">&#34;My dear fellow,&#34; said Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows in surprise, &#34;I asked you because I thought you might be able to give me an answer. </span>
      <span id="f6131">That is all. </span>
      <span id="f6132"> I was going through the park last Sunday, and close by the Marble Arch there stood a little crowd of shabby-looking people listening to some vulgar street-preacher. </span>
      <span id="f6133">As I passed by, I heard the man yelling out that question to his audience. </span>
      <span id="f6134"> It struck me as being rather dramatic. </span>
      <span id="f6135"> London is very rich in curious effects of that kind. </span>
      <span id="f6136">A wet Sunday, an uncouth Christian in a mackintosh, a ring of sickly white faces under a broken roof of dripping umbrellas, and a wonderful phrase flung into the air by shrill hysterical lips--it was really very good in its way, quite a suggestion. </span>
      <span id="f6137"> I thought of telling the prophet that art had a soul, but that man had not. </span>
      <span id="f6138"> I am afraid, however, he would not have understood me.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6139">&#34;Don&#39;t, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f6140"> The soul is a terrible reality. </span>
      <span id="f6141"> It can be bought, and sold, and bartered away. </span>
      <span id="f6142"> It can be poisoned, or made perfect. </span>
      <span id="f6143"> There is a soul in each one of us. </span>
      <span id="f6144"> I know it.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6145">&#34;Do you feel quite sure of that, Dorian?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6146">&#34;Quite sure.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6147">&#34;Ah! </span>
      <span id="f6148">then it must be an illusion. </span>
      <span id="f6149"> The things one feels absolutely certain about are never true. </span>
      <span id="f6150"> That is the fatality of faith, and the lesson of romance. </span>
      <span id="f6151"> How grave you are! </span>
      <span id="f6152"> Don&#39;t be so serious. </span>
      <span id="f6153"> What have you or I to do with the superstitions of our age? </span>
      <span id="f6154"> No:  we have given up our belief in the soul. </span>
      <span id="f6155"> Play me something. </span>
      <span id="f6156"> Play me a nocturne, Dorian, and, as you play, tell me, in a low voice, how you have kept your youth. </span>
      <span id="f6157"> You must have some secret. </span>
      <span id="f6158"> I am only ten years older than you are, and I am wrinkled, and worn, and yellow. </span>
      <span id="f6159"> You are really wonderful, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f6160"> You have never looked more charming than you do to-night. </span>
      <span id="f6161">You remind me of the day I saw you first. </span>
      <span id="f6162"> You were rather cheeky, very shy, and absolutely extraordinary. </span>
      <span id="f6163"> You have changed, of course, but not in appearance. </span>
      <span id="f6164"> I wish you would tell me your secret. </span>
      <span id="f6165">To get back my youth I would do anything in the world, except take exercise, get up early, or be respectable. </span>
      <span id="f6166"> Youth! </span>
      <span id="f6167"> There is nothing like it. </span>
      <span id="f6168"> It&#39;s absurd to talk of the ignorance of youth. </span>
      <span id="f6169"> The only people to whose opinions I listen now with any respect are people much younger than myself. </span>
      <span id="f6170"> They seem in front of me. </span>
      <span id="f6171"> Life has revealed to them her latest wonder. </span>
      <span id="f6172"> As for the aged, I always contradict the aged. </span>
      <span id="f6173">I do it on principle. </span>
      <span id="f6174"> If you ask them their opinion on something that happened yesterday, they solemnly give you the opinions current in 1820, when people wore high stocks, believed in everything, and knew absolutely nothing. </span>
      <span id="f6175"> How lovely that thing you are playing is! </span>
      <span id="f6176"> I wonder, did Chopin write it at Majorca, with the sea weeping round the villa and the salt spray dashing against the panes? </span>
      <span id="f6177"> It is marvellously romantic. </span>
      <span id="f6178"> What a blessing it is that there is one art left to us that is not imitative! </span>
      <span id="f6179"> Don&#39;t stop. </span>
      <span id="f6180"> I want music to-night. </span>
      <span id="f6181">It seems to me that you are the young Apollo and that I am Marsyas listening to you. </span>
      <span id="f6182">I have sorrows, Dorian, of my own, that even you know nothing of. </span>
      <span id="f6183"> The tragedy of old age is not that one is old, but that one is young. </span>
      <span id="f6184"> I am amazed sometimes at my own sincerity. </span>
      <span id="f6185"> Ah, Dorian, how happy you are! </span>
      <span id="f6186">What an exquisite life you have had! </span>
      <span id="f6187"> You have drunk deeply of everything. </span>
      <span id="f6188"> You have crushed the grapes against your palate. </span>
      <span id="f6189"> Nothing has been hidden from you. </span>
      <span id="f6190"> And it has all been to you no more than the sound of music. </span>
      <span id="f6191"> It has not marred you. </span>
      <span id="f6192"> You are still the same.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6193">&#34;I am not the same, Harry.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6194">&#34;Yes, you are the same. </span>
      <span id="f6195"> I wonder what the rest of your life will be. </span>
      <span id="f6196">Don&#39;t spoil it by renunciations. </span>
      <span id="f6197"> At present you are a perfect type. </span>
      <span id="f6198">Don&#39;t make yourself incomplete. </span>
      <span id="f6199"> You are quite flawless now. </span>
      <span id="f6200"> You need not shake your head:  you know you are. </span>
      <span id="f6201"> Besides, Dorian, don&#39;t deceive yourself. </span>
      <span id="f6202"> Life is not governed by will or intention. </span>
      <span id="f6203"> Life is a question of nerves, and fibres, and slowly built-up cells in which thought hides itself and passion has its dreams. </span>
      <span id="f6204"> You may fancy yourself safe and think yourself strong. </span>
      <span id="f6205"> But a chance tone of colour in a room or a morning sky, a particular perfume that you had once loved and that brings subtle memories with it, a line from a forgotten poem that you had come across again, a cadence from a piece of music that you had ceased to play--I tell you, Dorian, that it is on things like these that our lives depend. </span>
      <span id="f6206"> Browning writes about that somewhere; but our own senses will imagine them for us. </span>
      <span id="f6207"> There are moments when the odour of _lilas blanc_ passes suddenly across me, and I have to live the strangest month of my life over again. </span>
      <span id="f6208"> I wish I could change places with you, Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f6209"> The world has cried out against us both, but it has always worshipped you. </span>
      <span id="f6210"> It always will worship you. </span>
      <span id="f6211">You are the type of what the age is searching for, and what it is afraid it has found. </span>
      <span id="f6212"> I am so glad that you have never done anything, never carved a statue, or painted a picture, or produced anything outside of yourself! </span>
      <span id="f6213"> Life has been your art. </span>
      <span id="f6214"> You have set yourself to music. </span>
      <span id="f6215"> Your days are your sonnets.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6216">Dorian rose up from the piano and passed his hand through his hair. </span>
      <span id="f6217">&#34;Yes, life has been exquisite,&#34; he murmured, &#34;but I am not going to have the same life, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f6218"> And you must not say these extravagant things to me. </span>
      <span id="f6219"> You don&#39;t know everything about me. </span>
      <span id="f6220"> I think that if you did, even you would turn from me. </span>
      <span id="f6221"> You laugh. </span>
      <span id="f6222"> Don&#39;t laugh.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6223">&#34;Why have you stopped playing, Dorian? </span>
      <span id="f6224"> Go back and give me the nocturne over again. </span>
      <span id="f6225"> Look at that great, honey-coloured moon that hangs in the dusky air. </span>
      <span id="f6226"> She is waiting for you to charm her, and if you play she will come closer to the earth. </span>
      <span id="f6227"> You won&#39;t? </span>
      <span id="f6228"> Let us go to the club, then. </span>
      <span id="f6229"> It has been a charming evening, and we must end it charmingly. </span>
      <span id="f6230"> There is some one at White&#39;s who wants immensely to know you--young Lord Poole, Bournemouth&#39;s eldest son. </span>
      <span id="f6231"> He has already copied your neckties, and has begged me to introduce him to you. </span>
      <span id="f6232"> He is quite delightful and rather reminds me of you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6233">&#34;I hope not,&#34; said Dorian with a sad look in his eyes. </span>
      <span id="f6234"> &#34;But I am tired to-night, Harry. </span>
      <span id="f6235"> I shan&#39;t go to the club. </span>
      <span id="f6236"> It is nearly eleven, and I want to go to bed early.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6237">&#34;Do stay. </span>
      <span id="f6238"> You have never played so well as to-night. </span>
      <span id="f6239">There was something in your touch that was wonderful. </span>
      <span id="f6240"> It had more expression than I had ever heard from it before.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6241">&#34;It is because I am going to be good,&#34; he answered, smiling. </span>
      <span id="f6242"> &#34;I am a little changed already.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6243">&#34;You cannot change to me, Dorian,&#34; said Lord Henry. </span>
      <span id="f6244"> &#34;You and I will always be friends.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6245">&#34;Yet you poisoned me with a book once. </span>
      <span id="f6246"> I should not forgive that. </span>
      <span id="f6247">Harry, promise me that you will never lend that book to any one. </span>
      <span id="f6248"> It does harm.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6249">&#34;My dear boy, you are really beginning to moralize. </span>
      <span id="f6250"> You will soon be going about like the converted, and the revivalist, warning people against all the sins of which you have grown tired. </span>
      <span id="f6251"> You are much too delightful to do that. </span>
      <span id="f6252"> Besides, it is no use. </span>
      <span id="f6253"> You and I are what we are, and will be what we will be. </span>
      <span id="f6254"> As for being poisoned by a book, there is no such thing as that. </span>
      <span id="f6255"> Art has no influence upon action. </span>
      <span id="f6256"> It annihilates the desire to act. </span>
      <span id="f6257"> It is superbly sterile. </span>
      <span id="f6258"> The books that the world calls immoral are books that show the world its own shame. </span>
      <span id="f6259">That is all. </span>
      <span id="f6260"> But we won&#39;t discuss literature. </span>
      <span id="f6261"> Come round to-morrow. </span>
      <span id="f6262">I am going to ride at eleven. </span>
      <span id="f6263"> We might go together, and I will take you to lunch afterwards with Lady Branksome. </span>
      <span id="f6264"> She is a charming woman, and wants to consult you about some tapestries she is thinking of buying. </span>
      <span id="f6265">Mind you come. </span>
      <span id="f6266"> Or shall we lunch with our little duchess? </span>
      <span id="f6267"> She says she never sees you now. </span>
      <span id="f6268"> Perhaps you are tired of Gladys? </span>
      <span id="f6269"> I thought you would be. </span>
      <span id="f6270"> Her clever tongue gets on one&#39;s nerves. </span>
      <span id="f6271"> Well, in any case, be here at eleven.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6272">&#34;Must I really come, Harry?&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6273">&#34;Certainly. </span>
      <span id="f6274"> The park is quite lovely now. </span>
      <span id="f6275"> I don&#39;t think there have been such lilacs since the year I met you.&#34;</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6276">&#34;Very well. </span>
      <span id="f6277"> I shall be here at eleven,&#34; said Dorian. </span>
      <span id="f6278"> &#34;Good night, Harry.&#34;  As he reached the door, he hesitated for a moment, as if he had something more to say. </span>
      <span id="f6279"> Then he sighed and went out.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>