<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="it" xml:lang="it">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>
    <title>CHAPTER 20</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <section epub:type="bodymatter chapter">
      <h2 id="f6280">CHAPTER 20</h2>
      <p>
      <span id="f6281">It was a lovely night, so warm that he threw his coat over his arm and did not even put his silk scarf round his throat. </span>
      <span id="f6282"> As he strolled home, smoking his cigarette, two young men in evening dress passed him. </span>
      <span id="f6283"> He heard one of them whisper to the other, &#34;That is Dorian Gray.&#34; He remembered how pleased he used to be when he was pointed out, or stared at, or talked about. </span>
      <span id="f6284"> He was tired of hearing his own name now. </span>
      <span id="f6285"> Half the charm of the little village where he had been so often lately was that no one knew who he was. </span>
      <span id="f6286"> He had often told the girl whom he had lured to love him that he was poor, and she had believed him. </span>
      <span id="f6287"> He had told her once that he was wicked, and she had laughed at him and answered that wicked people were always very old and very ugly. </span>
      <span id="f6288"> What a laugh she had!--just like a thrush singing. </span>
      <span id="f6289"> And how pretty she had been in her cotton dresses and her large hats! </span>
      <span id="f6290"> She knew nothing, but she had everything that he had lost.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6291">When he reached home, he found his servant waiting up for him. </span>
      <span id="f6292"> He sent him to bed, and threw himself down on the sofa in the library, and began to think over some of the things that Lord Henry had said to him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6293">Was it really true that one could never change? </span>
      <span id="f6294"> He felt a wild longing for the unstained purity of his boyhood--his rose-white boyhood, as Lord Henry had once called it. </span>
      <span id="f6295"> He knew that he had tarnished himself, filled his mind with corruption and given horror to his fancy; that he had been an evil influence to others, and had experienced a terrible joy in being so; and that of the lives that had crossed his own, it had been the fairest and the most full of promise that he had brought to shame. </span>
      <span id="f6296"> But was it all irretrievable? </span>
      <span id="f6297"> Was there no hope for him?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6298">Ah! </span>
      <span id="f6299">in what a monstrous moment of pride and passion he had prayed that the portrait should bear the burden of his days, and he keep the unsullied splendour of eternal youth! </span>
      <span id="f6300"> All his failure had been due to that. </span>
      <span id="f6301"> Better for him that each sin of his life had brought its sure swift penalty along with it. </span>
      <span id="f6302"> There was purification in punishment. </span>
      <span id="f6303">Not &#34;Forgive us our sins&#34; but &#34;Smite us for our iniquities&#34; should be the prayer of man to a most just God.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6304">The curiously carved mirror that Lord Henry had given to him, so many years ago now, was standing on the table, and the white-limbed Cupids laughed round it as of old. </span>
      <span id="f6305"> He took it up, as he had done on that night of horror when he had first noted the change in the fatal picture, and with wild, tear-dimmed eyes looked into its polished shield. </span>
      <span id="f6306"> Once, some one who had terribly loved him had written to him a mad letter, ending with these idolatrous words: &#34;The world is changed because you are made of ivory and gold. </span>
      <span id="f6307"> The curves of your lips rewrite history.&#34;  The phrases came back to his memory, and he repeated them over and over to himself. </span>
      <span id="f6308"> Then he loathed his own beauty, and flinging the mirror on the floor, crushed it into silver splinters beneath his heel. </span>
      <span id="f6309"> It was his beauty that had ruined him, his beauty and the youth that he had prayed for. </span>
      <span id="f6310"> But for those two things, his life might have been free from stain. </span>
      <span id="f6311"> His beauty had been to him but a mask, his youth but a mockery. </span>
      <span id="f6312"> What was youth at best? </span>
      <span id="f6313"> A green, an unripe time, a time of shallow moods, and sickly thoughts. </span>
      <span id="f6314"> Why had he worn its livery? </span>
      <span id="f6315"> Youth had spoiled him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6316">It was better not to think of the past. </span>
      <span id="f6317"> Nothing could alter that. </span>
      <span id="f6318"> It was of himself, and of his own future, that he had to think. </span>
      <span id="f6319"> James Vane was hidden in a nameless grave in Selby churchyard. </span>
      <span id="f6320"> Alan Campbell had shot himself one night in his laboratory, but had not revealed the secret that he had been forced to know. </span>
      <span id="f6321"> The excitement, such as it was, over Basil Hallward&#39;s disappearance would soon pass away. </span>
      <span id="f6322"> It was already waning. </span>
      <span id="f6323"> He was perfectly safe there. </span>
      <span id="f6324"> Nor, indeed, was it the death of Basil Hallward that weighed most upon his mind. </span>
      <span id="f6325"> It was the living death of his own soul that troubled him. </span>
      <span id="f6326"> Basil had painted the portrait that had marred his life. </span>
      <span id="f6327"> He could not forgive him that. </span>
      <span id="f6328"> It was the portrait that had done everything. </span>
      <span id="f6329"> Basil had said things to him that were unbearable, and that he had yet borne with patience. </span>
      <span id="f6330"> The murder had been simply the madness of a moment. </span>
      <span id="f6331"> As for Alan Campbell, his suicide had been his own act. </span>
      <span id="f6332"> He had chosen to do it. </span>
      <span id="f6333"> It was nothing to him.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6334">A new life! </span>
      <span id="f6335"> That was what he wanted. </span>
      <span id="f6336"> That was what he was waiting for. </span>
      <span id="f6337"> Surely he had begun it already. </span>
      <span id="f6338"> He had spared one innocent thing, at any rate. </span>
      <span id="f6339"> He would never again tempt innocence. </span>
      <span id="f6340"> He would be good.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6341">As he thought of Hetty Merton, he began to wonder if the portrait in the locked room had changed. </span>
      <span id="f6342"> Surely it was not still so horrible as it had been? </span>
      <span id="f6343"> Perhaps if his life became pure, he would be able to expel every sign of evil passion from the face. </span>
      <span id="f6344"> Perhaps the signs of evil had already gone away. </span>
      <span id="f6345"> He would go and look.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6346">He took the lamp from the table and crept upstairs. </span>
      <span id="f6347"> As he unbarred the door, a smile of joy flitted across his strangely young-looking face and lingered for a moment about his lips. </span>
      <span id="f6348"> Yes, he would be good, and the hideous thing that he had hidden away would no longer be a terror to him. </span>
      <span id="f6349"> He felt as if the load had been lifted from him already.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6350">He went in quietly, locking the door behind him, as was his custom, and dragged the purple hanging from the portrait. </span>
      <span id="f6351"> A cry of pain and indignation broke from him. </span>
      <span id="f6352"> He could see no change, save that in the eyes there was a look of cunning and in the mouth the curved wrinkle of the hypocrite. </span>
      <span id="f6353"> The thing was still loathsome--more loathsome, if possible, than before--and the scarlet dew that spotted the hand seemed brighter, and more like blood newly spilled. </span>
      <span id="f6354"> Then he trembled. </span>
      <span id="f6355"> Had it been merely vanity that had made him do his one good deed? </span>
      <span id="f6356"> Or the desire for a new sensation, as Lord Henry had hinted, with his mocking laugh? </span>
      <span id="f6357"> Or that passion to act a part that sometimes makes us do things finer than we are ourselves? </span>
      <span id="f6358"> Or, perhaps, all these? </span>
      <span id="f6359"> And why was the red stain larger than it had been? </span>
      <span id="f6360"> It seemed to have crept like a horrible disease over the wrinkled fingers. </span>
      <span id="f6361"> There was blood on the painted feet, as though the thing had dripped--blood even on the hand that had not held the knife. </span>
      <span id="f6362"> Confess? </span>
      <span id="f6363"> Did it mean that he was to confess? </span>
      <span id="f6364"> To give himself up and be put to death? </span>
      <span id="f6365"> He laughed. </span>
      <span id="f6366"> He felt that the idea was monstrous. </span>
      <span id="f6367"> Besides, even if he did confess, who would believe him? </span>
      <span id="f6368"> There was no trace of the murdered man anywhere. </span>
      <span id="f6369">Everything belonging to him had been destroyed. </span>
      <span id="f6370"> He himself had burned what had been below-stairs. </span>
      <span id="f6371">The world would simply say that he was mad. </span>
      <span id="f6372">They would shut him up if he persisted in his story.... </span>
      <span id="f6373">Yet it was his duty to confess, to suffer public shame, and to make public atonement. </span>
      <span id="f6374"> There was a God who called upon men to tell their sins to earth as well as to heaven. </span>
      <span id="f6375"> Nothing that he could do would cleanse him till he had told his own sin. </span>
      <span id="f6376"> His sin? </span>
      <span id="f6377"> He shrugged his shoulders. </span>
      <span id="f6378">The death of Basil Hallward seemed very little to him. </span>
      <span id="f6379"> He was thinking of Hetty Merton. </span>
      <span id="f6380"> For it was an unjust mirror, this mirror of his soul that he was looking at. </span>
      <span id="f6381"> Vanity? </span>
      <span id="f6382"> Curiosity? </span>
      <span id="f6383"> Hypocrisy? </span>
      <span id="f6384"> Had there been nothing more in his renunciation than that? </span>
      <span id="f6385"> There had been something more. </span>
      <span id="f6386"> At least he thought so. </span>
      <span id="f6387"> But who could tell? </span>
      <span id="f6388">... </span>
      <span id="f6389">No. </span>
      <span id="f6390">There had been nothing more. </span>
      <span id="f6391"> Through vanity he had spared her. </span>
      <span id="f6392"> In hypocrisy he had worn the mask of goodness. </span>
      <span id="f6393"> For curiosity&#39;s sake he had tried the denial of self. </span>
      <span id="f6394"> He recognized that now.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6395">But this murder--was it to dog him all his life? </span>
      <span id="f6396"> Was he always to be burdened by his past? </span>
      <span id="f6397"> Was he really to confess? </span>
      <span id="f6398"> Never. </span>
      <span id="f6399"> There was only one bit of evidence left against him. </span>
      <span id="f6400"> The picture itself--that was evidence. </span>
      <span id="f6401"> He would destroy it. </span>
      <span id="f6402"> Why had he kept it so long? </span>
      <span id="f6403"> Once it had given him pleasure to watch it changing and growing old. </span>
      <span id="f6404"> Of late he had felt no such pleasure. </span>
      <span id="f6405"> It had kept him awake at night. </span>
      <span id="f6406">When he had been away, he had been filled with terror lest other eyes should look upon it. </span>
      <span id="f6407"> It had brought melancholy across his passions. </span>
      <span id="f6408">Its mere memory had marred many moments of joy. </span>
      <span id="f6409"> It had been like conscience to him. </span>
      <span id="f6410"> Yes, it had been conscience. </span>
      <span id="f6411"> He would destroy it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6412">He looked round and saw the knife that had stabbed Basil Hallward. </span>
      <span id="f6413"> He had cleaned it many times, till there was no stain left upon it. </span>
      <span id="f6414"> It was bright, and glistened. </span>
      <span id="f6415"> As it had killed the painter, so it would kill the painter&#39;s work, and all that that meant. </span>
      <span id="f6416"> It would kill the past, and when that was dead, he would be free. </span>
      <span id="f6417"> It would kill this monstrous soul-life, and without its hideous warnings, he would be at peace. </span>
      <span id="f6418"> He seized the thing, and stabbed the picture with it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6419">There was a cry heard, and a crash. </span>
      <span id="f6420"> The cry was so horrible in its agony that the frightened servants woke and crept out of their rooms. </span>
      <span id="f6421">Two gentlemen, who were passing in the square below, stopped and looked up at the great house. </span>
      <span id="f6422"> They walked on till they met a policeman and brought him back. </span>
      <span id="f6423"> The man rang the bell several times, but there was no answer. </span>
      <span id="f6424"> Except for a light in one of the top windows, the house was all dark. </span>
      <span id="f6425"> After a time, he went away and stood in an adjoining portico and watched.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6426">&#34;Whose house is that, Constable?&#34; asked the elder of the two gentlemen.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6427">&#34;Mr. </span>
      <span id="f6428">Dorian Gray&#39;s, sir,&#34; answered the policeman.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6429">They looked at each other, as they walked away, and sneered. </span>
      <span id="f6430"> One of them was Sir Henry Ashton&#39;s uncle.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6431">Inside, in the servants&#39; part of the house, the half-clad domestics were talking in low whispers to each other. </span>
      <span id="f6432"> Old Mrs. </span>
      <span id="f6433">Leaf was crying and wringing her hands. </span>
      <span id="f6434"> Francis was as pale as death.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6435">After about a quarter of an hour, he got the coachman and one of the footmen and crept upstairs. </span>
      <span id="f6436"> They knocked, but there was no reply. </span>
      <span id="f6437">They called out. </span>
      <span id="f6438"> Everything was still. </span>
      <span id="f6439"> Finally, after vainly trying to force the door, they got on the roof and dropped down on to the balcony. </span>
      <span id="f6440"> The windows yielded easily--their bolts were old.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
      <span id="f6441">When they entered, they found hanging upon the wall a splendid portrait of their master as they had last seen him, in all the wonder of his exquisite youth and beauty. </span>
      <span id="f6442"> Lying on the floor was a dead man, in evening dress, with a knife in his heart. </span>
      <span id="f6443"> He was withered, wrinkled, and loathsome of visage. </span>
      <span id="f6444"> It was not till they had examined the rings that they recognized who it was.</span>
      </p>
    </section>
  </body>
</html>